



  Transcriber’s Note
  Italic text displayed as: _italic_
  Bold text displayed as: =bold=




  FAMILY
  FARE
  food management
  and recipes

  U.S. DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE · HOME AND GARDEN BULLETIN NO. 1




CONTENTS


                                                                    Page

  Nutrition ... food at work for
  you                                                                  2
    A guide to eat by                                                  2
    How to use the guide                                               3
    Maintaining desirable weight                                       6
    Tips on meal planning                                              6
  Servings and pounds                                                  7
    Meat, poultry, and fish                                            7
    Vegetables and fruits                                              7
  Smart buying                                                         8
    Meat                                                               8
    Poultry                                                            9
    Fish                                                              10
    Eggs                                                              11
    Fresh fruits and vegetables                                       11
    Canned and frozen foods                                           14
  Wise storing                                                        14
    Meat, poultry, and fish                                           14
    Eggs                                                              14
    Fresh fruits and vegetables                                       14
    Fats and oils                                                     15
    Canned, frozen, and dried foods                                   15
  Ingredients and measurements                                        16
    About ingredients                                                 16
    Measuring foods                                                   16
  Main dishes                                                         18
    Meat                                                              18
    Poultry                                                           26
    Fish                                                              32
    Eggs, cheese, and dry beans                                       36
  Vegetables                                                          42
    Fresh vegetables                                                  42
    Frozen and canned vegetables                                      42
    Serving boiled vegetables                                         43
  Salads and salad dressings                                          49
    Tips on salad making                                              49
    Tips on dressings                                                 49
    Salad go-togethers                                                49
  Soups                                                               54
  Sauces and gravies                                                  57
    White sauce                                                       57
    Gravy                                                             57
  Breads and sandwiches                                               59
    Hot breads                                                        59
    Sandwiches                                                        62
  Desserts                                                            64
  Ways to use leftovers                                               74
  Cooking terms                                                       76
  Index to recipes                                                    78


  _Prepared by_

  Human Nutrition Research Division
  and
  Consumer and Food Economics Research Division
  Agricultural Research Service

  Acknowledgment is made to Fish and Wildlife Service, U.S. Department
  of the Interior, for contributions to this publication.

  Washington, D.C.      Revised April 1968

  For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing
  Office Washington, D.C. 20402—Price 30 cents




FAMILY FARE

food management and recipes

[Illustration Styled chicken and food scale]


Whether you are just learning the skills of food management and
good cooking or are an experienced hand in the kitchen, this
booklet—prepared by USDA food and nutrition scientists—can serve you
well.

It combines good eating and good nutrition. It packs the results of
years of food and nutrition research into a ready handbook for everyday
use. It tells how to get the nutrients you need from a variety of
foods—then translates this knowledge into taste-tested recipes and
well-balanced meals.

Feeding your family well takes less time and work than it used to.
Today’s foods can have built-in convenience. Meals can be more varied
because more food choices are available.

       *       *       *       *       *

In this publication you’ll find—

 • A daily food guide—a simple, workable presentation of the kinds and
 amounts of foods to have each day.

 • Tips on meal planning.

 • Helpful information on buying, storing, measuring, and using foods.

 • A selection of recipes—main dishes, vegetables, salads, soups,
 sauces, breads, sandwiches, desserts—plus variations of some of these
 recipes.

 • Menu suggestions.

 • A list of cooking terms.




NUTRITION....

Food At Work For You


Nutrition is the food you eat and how the body uses it.

People differ in how much they want to know about nutrition, but
everyone needs to know a few facts about food and health as a basis for
selecting the foods to eat.

You need food to get energy for work and play, to move, to breathe,
to keep the heart beating—just to be alive. Children and youths need
energy from food for growth.

Food also provides a variety of substances—nutrients—that are essential
for the building, the upkeep, and the repair of body tissues, and for
the efficient functioning of the body.

Everyone needs the same nutrients throughout life but in different
amounts. Proportionately greater amounts are required for the growth
of a body than just for its upkeep. Boys and men need more energy and
nutrients than girls and women. Large people need more than small
people. Active people require more food energy than inactive ones.
People recovering from illness need more than healthy people.

You and your family can get all the nutrients you need from foods, but
no one food contains all the nutrients in the amounts required for
growth and health. Only a variety of different kinds of foods will
supply all you need.


A guide to eat by

Nutrition scientists have translated knowledge of the nutrient needs of
people and the nutritive values of foods into an easy-to-use guide for
food selection.

This Daily Food Guide, on pages 4 and 5, sorts foods into four groups
on the basis of their similarity in nutrient content. Each of the broad
food groups has a special contribution to make toward an adequate diet.

Here are some of the reasons different food groups are emphasized in
the guide and the names of some of the nutrients these foods provide.

Meat, poultry, fish, and eggs from the _meat group_ and their
alternates—dry beans, dry peas, and nuts—are valued for their protein.
This is needed for the growth and repair of body tissues—muscle,
organs, blood, skin, and hair. These foods also contribute iron and the
B-vitamins—thiamine, riboflavin, and niacin.

Vegetables and fruits from the _vegetable-fruit group_ are valuable
sources of vitamins and minerals. In the guide, this group is counted
on to supply most of the vitamin C and a large share of the vitamin A
value in the diet. Choices are directed toward the citrus fruits and
some other foods that are among the better sources of vitamin C; and
toward the dark-green and deep-yellow ones for vitamin A value.

Vitamin C is needed for healthy gums and body tissues. Vitamin A is
important for growth, normal vision, and a healthy condition of the
skin and other body surfaces.

Foods from the _milk group_ are relied on to meet most of the calcium
needs for the day. Milk is the leading source of the mineral calcium,
which is needed for bones and teeth.

Milk also provides protein, riboflavin, vitamin A, and many other
nutrients. Cheese and ice cream also supply these nutrients, but in
different proportions.

The _bread-cereal group_, with its whole-grain and enriched bread and
other cereal products, furnishes important amounts of protein, iron,
several of the B-vitamins, and food energy.

Fats, oils, sugars, and sweets are not emphasized in the guide because
they are common in every diet. Some of the fats and oils provide
certain of the vitamins, and some furnish essential fatty acids, but
the chief nutritional contribution of these foods is energy value.


How to use the guide

Homemakers who follow the guide will find it flexible enough to use in
choosing foods for families.

Food choices within the groups are wide enough to allow for a variety
of everyday foods. Meals can be planned to include family favorites,
foods in season, and foods to fit the family budget.

The size of servings can be suited to the needs of family members—small
servings for children and for those wanting to lose weight; extra large
servings (or seconds) for very active adults, teenagers, and those
wanting to gain weight. Pregnant and nursing women also need more food.

Foods from the Daily Food Guide fit easily into a three-meals-a-day
pattern of eating. Foods from each group often appear in each meal—but
this isn’t essential. The important thing is that the suggested number
of servings from each food group be included sometime during the day.

Many people want and need more food than the minimum servings suggested
from the four food groups. To round out meals and satisfy appetites,
you can include additional foods from the four groups as well as other
foods not listed in these groups.


_A Daily Food Guide_


MEAT GROUP


_Foods Included_

Beef; veal; lamb; pork; variety meats, such as liver, heart, kidney.

Poultry and eggs.

Fish and shellfish.

As alternates—dry beans, dry peas, lentils, nuts, peanuts, peanut
butter.


_Amounts Recommended_

Choose 2 or more servings every day.

Count as a serving: 2 to 3 ounces of lean cooked meat, poultry, or
fish—all without bone; 2 eggs; 1 cup cooked dry beans, dry peas, or
lentils; 4 tablespoons peanut butter.


VEGETABLE-FRUIT GROUP


_Foods Included_

All vegetables and fruits. This guide emphasizes those that are
valuable as sources of vitamin C and vitamin A.


_Sources of Vitamin C_

_Good sources._—Grapefruit or grapefruit juice; orange or orange juice;
cantaloup; guava; mango; papaya; raw strawberries; broccoli; brussels
sprouts; green pepper; sweet red pepper.

_Fair sources._—Honeydew melon; lemon; tangerine or tangerine juice;
watermelon; asparagus tips; raw cabbage; collards; garden cress; kale;
kohlrabi; mustard greens; potatoes and sweetpotatoes cooked in the
jacket; spinach; tomatoes or tomato juice; turnip greens.

_Sources of Vitamin A_

Dark-green and deep-yellow vegetables and a few fruits, namely:
Apricots, broccoli, cantaloup, carrots, chard, collards, cress, kale,
mango, persimmon, pumpkin, spinach, sweetpotatoes, turnip greens and
other dark-green leaves, winter squash.


_Amounts Recommended_

Choose 4 or more servings every day, including:

 1 serving of a good source of vitamin C or 2 servings of a fair source.

 1 serving, at least every other day, of a good source of vitamin A. If
 the food chosen for vitamin C is also a good source of vitamin A, the
 additional serving of a vitamin A food may be omitted.

The remaining 1 to 3 or more servings may be of any vegetable or fruit,
including those that are valuable for vitamin C and for vitamin A.

Count as 1 serving: ½ cup of vegetable or fruit; or a portion as
ordinarily served, such as 1 medium apple, banana, orange, or potato,
half a medium grapefruit or cantaloup, or the juice of 1 lemon.


MILK GROUP


_Foods Included_

Milk—fluid whole, evaporated, skim, dry, buttermilk.

Cheese—cottage; cream; Cheddar-type, natural or process.

Ice cream.

[Illustration: Dairy products]


_Amounts Recommended_

Some milk every day for everyone.

Recommended amounts are given below in terms of 8-ounce cups of whole
fluid milk:

  Children under 9     2 to 3
  Children 9 to 12     3 or more
  Teen-agers           4 or more
  Adults               2 or more
  Pregnant women       3 or more
  Nursing mothers      4 or more

Part or all of the milk may be fluid skim milk, buttermilk, evaporated
milk, or dry milk.

Cheese and ice cream may replace part of the milk. The amount of either
it will take to replace a given amount of milk is figured on the basis
of calcium content. Common portions of cheese and of ice cream and
their milk equivalents in calcium are:

  1-inch cube Cheddar-type cheese = ½ cup milk
  ½ cup cottage cheese            = ⅓ cup milk
  2 tablespoons cream cheese      = 1 tablespoon milk
  ½ cup ice cream                 = ¼ cup milk


BREAD-CEREAL GROUP


_Foods Included_

All breads and cereals that are whole grain, enriched, or restored;
_check labels to be sure_.

Specifically, this group includes: Breads; cooked cereals; ready-to-eat
cereals; cornmeal; crackers; flour; grits; macaroni and spaghetti;
noodles; rice; rolled oats; and quick breads and other baked goods if
made with whole-grain or enriched flour. Bulgur and parboiled rice and
wheat also may be included in this group.

[Illustration: Bread products]


_Amounts Recommended_

Choose 4 servings or more daily. Or, if no cereals are chosen, have
an extra serving of breads or baked goods, which will make at least 5
servings from this group daily.

Count as 1 serving: 1 slice of bread; 1 ounce ready-to-eat cereal; ½
to ¾ cup cooked cereal, cornmeal, grits, macaroni, noodles, rice, or
spaghetti.


OTHER FOODS

To round out meals and meet energy needs, almost everyone will use
some foods not specified in the four food groups. Such foods include:
unenriched, refined breads, cereals, flours; sugars; butter, margarine,
other fats. These often are ingredients in a recipe or added to other
foods during preparation or at the table.

Try to include some vegetable oil among the fats used.


Maintaining desirable weight

It is best to maintain desirable weight for one’s height at all ages,
even during childhood. Here are two principles that you can use—

• Reduce food intake as you become less active. Exercise and activity
use up energy—or calories. If you cut down activity but not food, you
are providing more energy than the body needs. The excess is stored as
fat.

• Reduce food intake as you—as an adult—get older. As adults grow
older, less energy is needed to keep the body functioning.

To reduce food intake without shortchanging the body of essential
nutrients, follow the pattern of choices suggested by the Daily Food
Guide. Weight watchers need the same types of food for health as
everyone else. Crash diets and food fads are not the answer and may be
dangerous to health.

Cut down on food, but don’t cut out any important kinds of foods.

Snacks are counted as a part of the day’s total food. Sensible snacking
can help meet nutritional needs, but indiscriminate eating between
meals usually leads to more calories than are wanted, less of some
nutrients than are needed.

Specific information on controlling weight is given in Home and Garden
Bulletin 74, “Food and Your Weight.” It includes basic weight-control
facts, suggestions for reducing or gaining weight, meals and menus, and
calorie values of common foods.


Tips on meal planning

Keep these points in mind when you plan meals for your family:

• Include a variety of foods each day and from day to day. Introduce a
new food from time to time.

• Vary flavors and textures. Contrast strong flavor with mild, sweet
with sour. Combine crisp textures with smooth.

• Try to have some meat, poultry, fish, eggs, milk or cheese at each
meal.

• Make a collection of nutritious recipes that the family enjoys and
serve them often.

• Brighten food with color—a slice of red tomato, a sprig of dark
greens, or other garnish.

• Combine different sizes and shapes of food in a meal, when possible.




Servings and Pounds


If you are a thrifty food shopper, you learn to buy the kinds and
amounts of food that your family will use—with a minimum of waste. To
avoid waste and to make the most of your food dollar, you also need to
know how many servings you get from a market unit, such as 1 pound of
fresh carrots or a 10-ounce package of frozen peaches.

Information in this section can help you decide how much to buy to feed
your family.

The amount of meat, poultry, and fish to buy varies with the amount of
bone, fat, and breading.


Meat, poultry, and fish

                                 _Servings
                                    per
                                  pound_[1]
  =MEAT=
  Much bone or gristle             1 or 2
  Medium amounts of bone           2 or 3
  Little or no bone                3 or 4
  =POULTRY (READY-TO-COOK)=
  Chicken                          2 or 3
  Turkey                           2 or 3
  Duck and goose                        2
  =FISH=
  Whole                            1 or 2
  Dressed or pan-dressed           2 or 3
  Portions or steaks                    3
  Fillets                          3 or 4

  [1] Three ounces of cooked lean meat, poultry, or fish per serving.


Vegetables and fruits

For this table, a serving of vegetable is ½ cup cooked vegetable unless
otherwise noted. A serving of fruit is ½ cup fruit; 1 medium apple,
banana, peach, or pear; or 2 apricots or plums. A serving of cooked
fresh or dried fruit is ½ cup fruit and liquid.

                                 _Servings
                                    per
                                  pound_[2]
  =FRESH VEGETABLES=
  Asparagus                        3 or 4
  Beans, lima[2]                        2
  Beans, snap                      5 or 6
  Beets, diced[3]                  3 or 4
  Broccoli                         3 or 4
  Brussels sprouts                 4 or 5
  Cabbage:
    Raw, shredded                  9 or 10
    Cooked                         4 or 5
  Carrots:
    Raw, diced or shredded[3]      5 or 6
    Cooked[3]                           4
  Cauliflower                           3
  Celery:
    Raw, chopped or diced          5 or 6
    Cooked                              4
  Kale[4]                          5 or 6
  Okra                             4 or 5
  Onions, cooked                   3 or 4
  Parsnips[3]                           4
  Peas[5]                               2
  Potatoes                              4
  Spinach[6]                            4
  Squash, summer                   3 or 4
  Squash, winter                   2 or 3
  Sweetpotatoes                    3 or 4
  Tomatoes, raw, diced or sliced        4

  [2] As purchased.

  [3] Bought in pod.

  [4] Bought without tops.

  [5] Bought untrimmed.

  [6] Bought prepackaged.

                                     _Servings
                                    per package
                                   (9 or 10 oz.)_
  =FROZEN VEGETABLES=
  Asparagus                             2 or 3
  Beans, lima                           3 or 4
  Beans, snap                           3 or 4
  Broccoli                                   3
  Brussels sprouts                           3
  Cauliflower                                3
  Corn, whole kernel                         3
  Kale                                  2 or 3
  Peas                                       3
  Spinach                               2 or 3

                                     _Servings
                                       per can
                                      (1 lb.)_
  =CANNED VEGETABLES=
  Most vegetables                       3 or 4
  Greens, such as kale or spinach       2 or 3

                                     _Servings
                                     per pound_
  =DRY VEGETABLES=
  Dry beans                                 11
  Dry peas, lentils                   10 or 11

                                _Servings per
                               market unit_[7]
  =FRESH FRUIT=
  Apples           }
  Bananas          }
  Peaches          }           3 or 4 per pound
  Pears            }
  Plums            }

  Apricots         }
  Cherries, sweet  }           5 or 6 per pound
  Grapes, seedless }

  Blueberries      }
  Raspberries      }           4 or 5 per pint
  Strawberries                 8 or 9 per quart

  [7] As purchased.

                                     _Servings
                                    per package
                                  (10 or 12 oz.)_
  =FROZEN FRUIT=
  Blueberries                           3 or 4
  Peaches                               2 or 3
  Raspberries                           2 or 3
  Strawberries                          2 or 3

                                      _Servings
                                       per can
                                       (1 lb.)_
  =CANNED FRUIT=
  Served with liquid                         4
  Drained                               2 or 3

                                      _Servings
                                      per package
                                       (8 oz.)_
  =DRIED FRUIT=
  Apples                                     8
  Apricots                                   6
  Mixed fruits                               6
  Peaches                                    7
  Pears                                      4
  Prunes                                4 or 5




Smart Buying


Meat

Your best guides for selecting meat are the U.S. Department of
Agriculture grades. Federally graded meats carry a purple grade stamp—a
shield enclosing the letters “USDA” and the grade name. These stamps
divide the wide range of meat quality into several groups.

Grade stamps appear on most retail beef, veal, calf, lamb, and mutton
cuts. Pork is not usually graded. Some meat packers, wholesalers, and
retailers use their own brand names to designate the quality levels of
their products.

USDA Prime, the top grade, is used largely by hotels and restaurants.
USDA Choice and USDA Good are the grades most commonly found in retail
markets. USDA Standard and Commercial grades are not often sold at
retail.

[Illustration:

  38
  U. S.
  INSP’D & P’S’D

  U. S.
  INSPECTED
  AND PASSED BY
  DEPARTMENT OF
  AGRICULTURE
  EST. 38

USDA meat inspection marks.]

Another purple stamp that may appear on fresh retail meat cuts is the
circular mark of Federal meat inspection (below, left). This shows
that meat is inspected and passed for wholesomeness, and that it is
processed under strict sanitary conditions. A round mark of Federal
meat inspection (below, right) also appears on processed meat products
to show they are made from wholesome meat, are processed under sanitary
conditions, and are truthfully labeled. All fresh or processed meat
products that are shipped from one State to another must bear a mark of
Federal inspection.

Not all meat is federally inspected. Some States and cities have their
own regulations for locally produced meats. However, the Wholesome Meat
Act of 1967 will ultimately assure consumers that all meat is inspected
by either the Federal Government or an adequate State system.


_Meat and your money_

At the meat counter, consider the amount of cooked lean meat you will
get for the money you pay.

The prices for a pound of beef chuck roast, pork rib roast, ground
beef, and beef liver may be about the same at your store. In many
instances, a pound of these roasts will provide only about half as much
cooked lean meat as a pound of ground beef or beef liver. The other
half of the pound of roast is bone, excess fat, and drippings.

So it would take twice as many pounds—and twice as much money—to feed
your family the roasts as it would the ground beef or liver, even
though the price per pound is the same.


Poultry

In retail markets, ready-to-cook poultry is available chilled or
frozen, whole or cut up. Processed poultry products are also on the
market in canned, frozen, dehydrated, and other convenient forms.

[Illustration: USDA poultry inspection and grademarks.]

Look for both the round U.S. Department of Agriculture inspection mark
and the shield-shaped grademark on the poultry you buy.

The round USDA inspection mark (above, left) means that poultry and
poultry products have been officially inspected for wholesomeness,
are truthfully labeled, and are not adulterated. USDA inspection is
required in plants that produce poultry products for sale across State
lines or in foreign trade.

The shield-shaped grademark (above, right) shows that the poultry has
been officially graded for quality. Poultry must be USDA-inspected
before it can be federally graded. The U.S. grades for poultry are
based on meatiness, freedom from defects, and general appearance. The
best grade of poultry is marked “USDA Grade A.”

Chicken, turkey, duck, and goose are common forms of poultry. Guinea
is available in some markets. The label may suggest suitable cooking
methods and indicate the age of the poultry—for chicken: “broiler or
fryer,” “roaster,” “stewing chicken;” for turkey: “fryer-roaster,”
“young hen,” “young tom,” “mature turkey.”


_Types of poultry_

Broilers, fryers, roasters, capons, and Rock Cornish game hens are
young chickens with tender meat. Stewing chickens, hens, and fowl are
mature chickens with less tender meat. Turkeys labeled fryer-roaster or
young turkey are young birds with tender meat. Most ducks are marketed
young as ducklings—broilers, fryers, and roasters. Most geese and
guineas are marketed as young geese and young guineas.

Ready-to-cook chickens are sold chilled or frozen—whole or cut into
parts. Most ready-to-cook turkeys are marketed frozen whole, in
a wide range of sizes; some are available chilled. Frozen turkey
halves, quarters, or parts are sometimes available. Ducks, geese, and
guineas—like turkeys—are generally marketed frozen whole. Ducklings are
also available as cut-up parts.

Frozen poultry, stuffed and ready for the oven, is available in many
markets. Boneless poultry roasts and rolls—so convenient—are also on
the market.


Fish

Today there are about 240 commercial species of fish and shellfish
marketed in the United States. They may be fresh, frozen, or canned.

Fresh fish are generally available by the pound in these forms—whole,
dressed, and in steaks, fillets, and chunks. Most fish dealers will
clean, dress, or fillet your fish for you. They can also tell you what
fish are in season and what fish are a good buy.

Frozen fish are usually packed during the season when they are
plentiful and are held in freezer storage until distributed. This means
that you can buy most fish throughout the year. Frozen fish come whole,
dressed, and in steaks, fillets, chunks, portions, and sticks.

Canned fish and specialty items containing fish are ready to serve or
use as bought. Canned tuna, salmon, mackerel, and Maine sardines are
widely available.


_Market forms_

Familiarize yourself with these market forms of fish:

 _Whole._—Fish marketed just as they come from the water. Ask your
 dealer to scale, eviscerate, and remove head, tail, and fins.

 _Dressed or pan-dressed._—Fish with scales and entrails removed,
 and—usually—head, tail, and fins removed. Small fish are called
 pan-dressed and are ready to cook as purchased. Large dressed fish may
 be cooked as purchased, but often are filleted or cut into steaks or
 chunks.

 _Steaks._—Cross-section slices from large dressed fish cut ⅝ to 1 inch
 thick. Steaks can be cooked as purchased.

 _Fillets._—Sides of the fish cut lengthwise away from the backbone.
 They may be skinned or the skin may be left on. Fillets are ready to
 cook as purchased.

 _Chunks._—Cross sections of large dressed fish. A cross section of
 the backbone is the only bone in a chunk. They are ready to cook as
 purchased.

 _Raw breaded fish portions._—Portions cut from frozen fish blocks,
 coated with a batter, breaded, packaged, and frozen. Raw breaded
 fish portions weigh more than 1½ ounces. They are ready to cook as
 purchased.

 _Fried fish portions._—Portions cut from frozen fish blocks, coated
 with a batter, breaded, partially cooked, packaged, and frozen. Fried
 fish portions weigh more than 1½ ounces. They are ready to heat and
 serve as purchased.

 _Fried fish sticks._—Sticks cut from frozen fish blocks, coated with
 a batter, breaded, partially cooked, packaged, and frozen. Fried fish
 sticks weigh up to 1½ ounces. They are ready to heat and serve as
 purchased.


_Inspection and grading_

The U.S. Department of the Interior provides an official inspection
service that enables you to identify high-quality seafoods. Such
products may be identified by the official USDI grade or inspection
shields that appear on the label. Fishery products that display these
shields have been processed under continuous in-plant inspection and
have met definite quality, processing, and packaging requirements.


Eggs

Buy graded eggs in cartons at a store that keeps them in refrigerated
cases. Federally graded eggs are identified with a shield-shaped
grademark that indicates the quality at the time of grading. If they
have been properly handled since grading, there should be little loss
in quality.

_Quality._—U.S. Grade AA (or Fresh Fancy) and Grade A eggs are
excellent for all purposes, but are especially good for poaching and
frying where the appearance of the finished product is important. Grade
B eggs are satisfactory for use in cooked dishes.

The grade of the egg does not affect its food value; lower grades are
as high in nutrients as top grades. Buy either white or brown eggs. The
color of the shell does not affect the nutritive value or quality of
the egg.

_Size._—Eggs are also classified by size according to weight per dozen.
Size is independent of quality; large eggs may be of high or low
quality and high-quality eggs may be of any size. Common market sizes
of eggs and the minimum weight per dozen:

  U.S. Extra Large—27 ounces.
  U.S. Large—24 ounces.
  U.S. Medium—21 ounces.
  U.S. Small—18 ounces.

The substitution of one size egg for another often makes little
difference in recipe results. However, in some recipes—for example in
sponge and angelfood cakes—the proportion of egg to other ingredients
is very important. For these recipes, it may be necessary to increase
the number of eggs if you are using a smaller size.


Fresh fruits and vegetables

Fresh fruits and vegetables are usually best in quality and lowest in
cost when in season.

Whatever fruit or vegetable you are buying, look first for freshness.
Pointers on selecting some fruits and vegetables follow on page 12.


_Fruits_

_Apples._—Good color usually indicates full flavor.

_Bananas._—Bananas should be firm, fresh in appearance, and unscarred.
Yellow or brown-flecked ones are ready for immediate use. Select
slightly green-colored bananas for use within a few days.

_Berries._—Select plump, solid berries with good color. Avoid wet or
leaky berries. Blackberries and raspberries with clinging caps may be
underripe. Strawberries without caps may be too ripe.

_Grapes._—Grapes should be plump, fresh in appearance, and firmly
attached to the stems. Red or black varieties should be well colored
for the variety. Most white or green varieties should have a slightly
amber tone.

_Melons (except watermelons)._—Ripe cantaloups have a yellowish surface
color; honeydews, a creamy color; crenshaws, a golden-yellow color
mottled with green; casabas, a yellow color; and persian melons, a dull
gray-green color. Ripe melons of these types usually have a fruity
aroma and a slight softening at the blossom end. A ripe cantaloup has
no stem; other melons may have stems attached.

_Oranges, grapefruit, and lemons._—Choose those heavy for their size.
Smooth, thin skins usually indicate more juice. Most skin markings do
not affect quality. Oranges with a slight greenish tinge may be just as
ripe as fully colored ones. Light or greenish-yellow lemons are more
tart than deep-yellow ones.

_Peaches._—Best quality peaches are fairly firm, not bruised, with
yellow or red color over the entire surface.

_Pears._—Some pears, especially winter varieties, are marketed when
slightly underripe and need to be ripened at home—at room temperature.
Pears are ripe and ready to eat when they yield slightly to moderate
pressure.

_Pineapples._—Pineapple varieties vary greatly in color. Ripe
pineapples have a fragrant, fruity aroma. Usually, the heavier the
fruit for its size, the better the quality. Avoid pineapples that have
decayed or moldy spots.

_Watermelons._—Ripe watermelons have a somewhat dull surface and a
creamy color underneath. The interior should be fully red and firm, and
should have few immature seeds.


_Vegetables_

_Asparagus._—Stalks should be tender and firm; tips should be close and
compact. Choose the stalks with little white—they are more tender. Use
asparagus promptly—it toughens rapidly.

_Beans, snap._—Choose slender beans with no large bumps (bumps indicate
large seeds). Avoid beans with dry-looking pods.

_Broccoli._—Look for small flower buds on compactly arranged heads with
good green color. Avoid yellowing, soft, or spreading heads.

_Brussels sprouts._—The heads should be firm with good green color.
Yellowing outer leaves and softness indicate aging. Smudgy, dirty spots
may indicate insect damage or decay.

_Cabbage._—Choose heads that are firm and heavy. Outer leaves should be
fresh, green, and free from worm-holes.

_Cauliflower._—Choose heads that are compact, firm, and white or creamy
white. Avoid discolored heads and those with soft spots.

_Celery._—Best-quality celery is fresh and crisp. It is clean and
has leaves that appear fresh; stems do not have black or brown
discoloration. Avoid pithy, woody, or very stringy celery.

_Corn._—Good-quality fresh corn has husks that are fresh and green. The
ears are well filled with plump, firm, milky kernels. Immature ears of
corn have small, undeveloped, watery kernels. Overmature ears have very
firm, large, starchy kernels, often indented.

_Cucumbers._—Choose firm, slender cucumbers for best quality. Avoid
yellowed cucumbers and those with withered or shrivelled ends.

_Lettuce (head)._—Select heads that are green, fresh, crisp, and fairly
firm to firm. Head lettuce should be free from rusty appearance and
excessive outer leaves.

_Onions (dry)._—Size and color do not affect flavor or quality of
dry onions. Clean, hard, well-shaped onions with dry skins are
usually of good quality. Moisture at the neck may be a sign of decay.
Mild-flavored onions, which are often large, may be elongated or flat.
Stronger-flavored onions are usually medium size and globe shaped.

_Peas and lima beans._—Select pods that are well filled but not
bulging. Avoid dried, spotted, yellowed, or flabby pods.

_Potatoes._—Best-quality potatoes are firm, smooth, and well shaped.
They are free from cuts, blemishes, and decay. To judge quality more
easily, look for potatoes that are reasonably clean. Avoid potatoes
with wasteful deep eyes. Potatoes with green skins may be bitter. If
you plan to buy a large quantity of potatoes, buy a few first to see if
they are the kind you want. Early-crop potatoes, harvested in spring
and summer, tend to be less mealy when cooked than those harvested
later.

_Root vegetables._—Choose smooth, firm vegetables. Very large carrots
may have woody cores; oversized radishes may be pithy; oversized
turnips, beets, and parsnips may be woody. The size and condition of
the tops on root vegetables do not necessarily indicate the eating
quality.

_Sweetpotatoes._—Choose sweetpotatoes that are clean, smooth, well
shaped, and firm. Damp or soft spots may indicate decay. There are two
types of sweetpotatoes. The moist type has soft, moist, orange-colored
flesh and bronze or rosy skin. The dry type has firm, dry, somewhat
mealy, yellow-colored flesh and yellow or light-brown skin.

_Tomatoes._—Choose tomatoes that are plump, firm, and uniformly pink,
red, or yellow in color. They should be free from growth cracks, scars,
and bruises. The best flavored tomatoes are ripened on the vine.

For more information, see Home and Garden Bulletins 141, “How to Buy
Fresh Fruits,” and 143, “How to Buy Fresh Vegetables.”


Canned and frozen foods

_Canned._—You may want to choose the highest quality for salads, or for
serving “as is.” But second quality may do for combination dishes such
as stews, casserole dishes, soups, and fruit puddings, where uniform
size, shape, or color is not important.

_Frozen._—Buy only packages that are frozen solid. Avoid partially
thawed packages that feel soft or are stained. Thawing and refreezing
lower quality.




Wise Storing


Meat, poultry, and fish

All meat should be promptly refrigerated.

The transparent wrap on prepackaged meat, poultry, or fish is designed
for refrigerator storage at home for 1 or 2 days.

Meat or poultry wrapped in meat paper when brought from the store—or
prepackaged roasts and steaks that may be stored in the refrigerator
for 3 to 5 days—should be unwrapped, placed on a platter or tray, and
loosely covered before refrigerating. Wrap and store fish separately
from other foods. Poultry giblets should also be wrapped and stored
separately.

Keep cooked meat, poultry, and fish, and the gravy or broth made from
them, in covered containers in the refrigerator. Use within 1 or 2 days.

_Cured and smoked meats._—ham, frankfurters, bacon, sausage—can be
stored in their original containers in the refrigerator. Mild-cured
hams are similar to fresh meats in keeping quality. Use whole hams
within a week, half hams and slices within 3 to 5 days. For best
flavor, use bacon, franks, and smoked sausages within a week.


Eggs

To help maintain quality, store eggs in the refrigerator promptly after
purchase—large end up.

For best flavor and cooking quality, use eggs within 1 week if
possible. Eggs held in the refrigerator for a long time may develop
off-flavors and lose some thickening and leavening power.

Cover leftover yolks with cold water and refrigerate in a tightly
covered container. Refrigerate leftover egg whites, too, in a tightly
covered container. Use leftover yolks or whites within 1 or 2 days.


Fresh fruits and vegetables

Fresh fruits should be ripe when stored in the refrigerator.
Some unripe fruits will ripen if left for a time at room
temperature—preferably in a cool room between 60° and 70° F.

Keep bananas at room temperature. They will turn dull brown if
refrigerated. Sort berries and cherries; then refrigerate, unwashed.
Use promptly. Refrigerate ripe pineapples.

Sweet corn keeps best if refrigerated uncovered in husks; use it
promptly. Removing tops from carrots, beets, and radishes reduces
wilting. Storing potatoes in a cool, dark place prevents greening.


STORAGE GUIDE FOR FRUITS AND VEGETABLES.


Hold at room temperature until ripe; then refrigerate, uncovered:

  Apples
  Apricots
  Avocados
  Berries
  Cherries
  Grapes
  Melons, except watermelons
  Nectarines
  Peaches
  Pears
  Plums
  Tomatoes


Store in cool room or refrigerate, uncovered:

  Grapefruit
  Lemons
  Limes
  Oranges


Store in cool room, away from bright light:

  Onions, mature
  Potatoes
  Rutabagas
  Squash, winter
  Sweetpotatoes


Refrigerate, covered:

  Asparagus
  Beans, snap or wax
  Beets
  Broccoli
  Cabbage
  Carrots
  Cauliflower
  Celery
  Corn, husked
  Cucumbers
  Greens
  Onions, green
  Parsnips
  Peas, shelled
  Peppers, green
  Radishes
  Squash, summer
  Turnips


Refrigerate, uncovered:

  Beans, lima, in pods
  Corn, in husks
  Peas, in pods
  Pineapples
  Watermelons


Fats and oils

Refrigerate lard, butter, margarine, drippings, and opened containers
of cooking and salad oils. You can store most firm vegetable
shortenings (those that have been hydrogenated), covered, at room
temperature. Refrigerate opened jars of salad dressing; do not freeze.


Canned, frozen, and dried foods

_Canned foods._—Store in a dry place at room temperature (not above 70°
F.).

_Frozen foods._—Can be stored in freezing unit of refrigerator up to 1
week. For longer storage, keep in a freezer at 0° F.

_Dried foods._—Store _dried fruits_ in tightly closed containers
at room temperature (not above 70° F.). In warm, humid weather,
refrigerate.

Store _nonfat dry milk_ in a closed container at a temperature of
75° F., or lower. Because of its higher milkfat content, _dry whole
milk_ does not keep as well as nonfat dry milk. Keep dry whole milk
in a tightly closed container in the refrigerator. Refrigerate
_reconstituted dry milk_ as you would fresh fluid milk.




Ingredients and Measurements


About ingredients

Ingredients that may be used in place of other ingredients are listed
on the next page.

Recipes in this bulletin were tested with the ingredients listed.
Sometimes a choice of ingredients is given in the recipe or under
Variations of the recipe.

“Flour” refers to _all-purpose flour, unsifted_. In a few recipes,
where “cake flour” is specified it is also unsifted. Recipes in
this bulletin are not intended for use with either instantized or
self-rising flour.

“Baking powder” refers to _double-acting baking powder_ that leavens
during mixing and again during baking. Quick-acting baking powder
(containing cream of tartar) is single-acting; it can be used most
satisfactorily in foods that are mixed and baked immediately. (See One
Ingredient For Another, p. 17, for amounts.)

“Fat or oil” refers to any type—butter, margarine, shortening, lard, or
any kind of vegetable oil. In recipes specifying a particular type of
fat—“butter or margarine,” for example—you’ll have best results with
the fat suggested. Recipes in this bulletin are not intended for use
with whipped fats.


Measuring foods

All measurements given in this bulletin are level.

Frequently used food measurements are given below.

  1 tablespoon = 3 teaspoons
  1 fluid ounce = 2 tablespoons
  ¼ cup = 4 tablespoons
  ⅓ cup = 5⅓ tablespoons
  ½ cup = 8 tablespoons
  ⅔ cup = 10⅔ tablespoons
  ¾ cup = 12 tablespoons
  1 cup = 16 tablespoons or 8 fluid ounces
  1 pint = 2 cups
  1 quart = 2 pints or 4 cups

_Part of cup._—Use tablespoons or small measures-½, ⅓, ¼ cup—for
greater accuracy.

_Brown sugar._—Pack firmly into cup or spoon and level off top with
straight, thin edge of spatula or knife.

_Solid fats._—Pack fat firmly into cup or smaller measure and level off
top with straight, thin edge of spatula or knife.

To measure less than 1 cup, you can also use the water method: Partly
fill a cup with cold water, leaving enough space for the amount of fat
needed. (To measure ¼ cup of fat, for example, fill cup with water to ¾
mark.) Spoon fat into cup, push under water until water level reaches
1-cup mark. Drain thoroughly before using fat.

For solid fat in sticks or pounds, cut off amount needed. A 1-pound
form measures about 2 cups; a ¼-pound stick of butter or margarine
measures ½ cup.

_Flour._—Spoon flour lightly into measuring cup until measure is
overflowing. Do not shake or tap cup. Level off top with straight, thin
edge of spatula or knife.

_Fine meal, fine crumbs._—Stir lightly with fork or spoon. Measure like
flour.

_Baking powder, cornstarch, cream of tartar, spices._—Dip spoon into
container and bring it up heaping full. Level off top with straight,
thin edge of spatula or knife.

_Dry milk._—Pour dry milk from spout or opening in package, or spoon
lightly, into measuring cup until measure is overflowing. Do not shake.
Level off top with straight, thin edge of spatula or knife.


ONE INGREDIENT FOR ANOTHER

  =For these=                 =You may use these=

  1 whole egg, for
    baking or
    thickening                • 2 egg yolks.

  1 cup butter or             • ⅞ cup vegetable or animal shortening
    margarine for               plus ½ teaspoon salt.
    baking

  1 ounce unsweetened
    chocolate                 • 3 tablespoons cocoa plus 1 tablespoon
                                fat.

  1 teaspoon double-acting   {• 2 teaspoons quick-acting baking powder.
    baking                   {• ¼ teaspoon baking soda plus ½ cup sour
    powder                   {  milk or buttermilk instead of ½ cup
                             {  sweet milk.

  1 cup buttermilk or        {• 1 cup fluid whole milk plus 1
    sour milk, for           {  tablespoon vinegar or lemon juice.
    baking                   {• 1 cup fluid whole milk plus 1¾
                             {  teaspoons cream of tartar.

  1 cup fluid whole milk     {• ½ cup evaporated milk plus ½ cup water.
                             {• 1 cup reconstituted nonfat dry milk
                             {• plus 2½ teaspoons butter or margarine.

  1 cup fluid skim milk       • 1 cup reconstituted nonfat dry milk.

  1 tablespoon flour,        {• ½ tablespoon cornstarch.
    for thickening           {• 2 teaspoons quick-cooking tapioca.

  1 cup cake flour,
    for baking                • ⅞ cup all-purpose flour.

 NOTE: Seven-eighths cup equals 1 level cup minus 2 tablespoons.




Main Dishes


Foods that abound in protein—meat, poultry, fish, eggs, and cheese—make
satisfying main dishes. Thrifty main dishes often combine these
protein-rich foods with vegetables and cereals—beef stew with
vegetables or dumplings, chicken with rice, fish with stuffing, cheese
with macaroni.

Dry beans and peas are also economical choices for main dishes.

If the main dish is not high in protein, you can supply additional
protein with other foods in the meal. If, for example, a pound of
meat is to serve eight persons, you might combine it with vegetables
or cereal in a casserole or stew, have milk to drink, and serve
cheese-topped apple pie for dessert.


Meat

Meat cooked at low to moderate temperatures is more tender, juicy, and
flavorful than meat cooked at high temperatures. There is more meat to
serve because there is less shrinkage at low temperatures.

Beef may be cooked rare, medium, or well done. Lamb is enjoyed either
medium or well done, but veal and pork are usually cooked well done.

Broiling, pan-frying, and roasting are recommended for tender meats
only. Less tender cuts are more satisfactory if braised, pot-roasted,
or simmered. For suggested methods for cooking, see guide on [page 19].

Frozen meat need not be thawed before cooking, but extra cooking time
will be required if it is not thawed first.


_Roasting ... beef, veal, lamb, pork_

Place roast, fat side up, on a rack in a shallow pan. Do not add water;
do not cover. Season either before or after cooking.

Check the timetable (p. 20) for approximate roasting times. The quality
of the meat, its size and shape, and its temperature at the start of
cooking will affect the roasting time. Times given here are for meats
at refrigerator temperature. Frozen roasts may take 1½ to 2 times as
long to cook as unfrozen roasts of the same weight and shape.

If you are using a meat thermometer, insert it so the tip is at the
center of the thickest part of the roast, and not touching bone or fat.


_Broiling ... beef, lamb, cured ham_

Slash fat around edge of meat to prevent curling. Place meat on cold
broiler grid.

Broiling temperature can be regulated by the distance meat is placed
from heat source and whether the door is open or closed during
broiling. Because broilers vary widely, follow the manufacturer’s
directions. If you like meat well done, place it farther from the heat
source than for medium or rare meat—to avoid burning the outside before
the center is cooked. Place thicker cuts farther from the heat source
than thin ones, for the same reason.


MEAT COOKING GUIDE

  BEEF               VEAL                LAMB          PORK

                             ROASTING

  Chuck or shoulder    Loin              Leg           Fresh and
  Rib                  Leg               Loin            cured ham
  Round                Shoulder          Rib           Fresh and
  Rump                                   Shoulder        cured shoulder
  Sirloin                                              Loin
  Sirloin tip                                          Spareribs
  Tenderloin

                              BROILING

  Patties (ground)     Liver         Chops              Bacon
  Thick steaks:                      Liver              Canadian bacon
    Chuck                            Patties (ground)   Chops
    Club                                                Cured ham
    Porterhouse                                           slices
    Rib
    Top round
    Sirloin
    T-bone

                          PAN-BROILING, PAN-FRYING

  Liver             Cube steaks       Chops             Bacon
  Patties (ground)  Liver             Liver             Canadian bacon
  Thin steaks:      Patties (ground)  Patties (ground)  Cured ham slices
    Club            Cutlets or round                    Liver
    Cube steaks       steak                             Thin chops
    Porterhouse     Loin and rib chops                  Thin steaks
    Rib
    Round
    Sirloin
    T-bone

                             BRAISING, POT-ROASTING

  Chuck or shoulder  Cutlets              Breast         Chops
  Flank              Loin and rib chops   Neck slices    Ham slices
  Liver              Roasts:              Shanks         Liver
  Round                Round              Shortribs      Shanks
  Rump                 Rump               Shoulder cuts  Spareribs
  Shortribs            Shoulder                          Steaks
  Sirloin tip                                            Tenderloin

                          SIMMERING, STEWING

  Brisket            Breast               Breast         Cured ham
  Corned beef        Riblets              Neck slices    Cured shoulder
  Heel of round      Shanks               Shanks         Hocks
  Neck                                                   Shanks
  Shanks                                                 Spareribs
  Shortribs


TIMETABLE FOR ROASTING MEATS

  ————————————————————+—————————————+——————————————+———————————
                      |             |  Approximate |  Internal
                      |Ready-to-cook|roasting time |temperature
  Kind and cut of meat|   weight    |   at 325°F.  |  of meat
                      |             |              | when done
  ————————————————————+—————————————+——————————————+———————————
          BEEF        |             |              |
  Standing ribs:      |  _Pounds_   | _Hours_      | °_F._
    Rare              |   6 to 8    | 2½ to 3      |   140
    Medium            |   6 to 8    | 3 to 3½      |   160
    Well done         |   6 to 8    | 3⅔ to 5      |   170
  Rolled rump:        |             |              |
    Rare              |   5         | 2¼           |   140
    Medium            |   5         | 3            |   160
    Well done         |   5         | 3¼           |   170
  Sirloin tip:        |             |              |
    Rare              |   3         | 1½           |   140
    Medium            |   3         | 2            |   160
    Well done         |   3         | 2¼           |   170
         VEAL         |             |              |
  Leg                 |   5 to 8    | 2½ to 3½     |   170
  Loin                |   5         | 3            |   170
  Shoulder            |   6         | 3½           |   170
         LAMB         |             |              |
  Leg (whole)         |   6 to 7    | 3¼ to 4      |   180
  Shoulder            |   3 to 6    | 2¼ to 3¼     |   180
  Rolled shoulder     |   3 to 5    | 2½ to 3      |   180
      PORK, FRESH     |             |              |
  Loin                |   3 to 5    | 2 to 4       |   170
  Shoulder            |   5 to 8    | 3½ to 5      |   185
  Ham, whole          |   10 to 14  | 5½ to 6      |   185
  Ham, half           |   6         | 4            |   185
  Spareribs           |   3         | 2            |   185
      PORK, CURED     |             |              |
  Cook-before-eating: |             |              |
    Ham, whole        |   12 to 16  | 3½ to 4¼     |   160
    Ham, half         |   6         | 2½           |   160
    Picnic shoulder   |   6         | 3⅓           |   170
  Fully cooked:[8]    |             |              |
    Ham, whole        |   12 to 16  | 3 to 3¾      |   130
    Ham, half         |   6         | 1½ to 2      |   130

  [8] Can also be served without heating, if desired.

Broil until top side of meat is browned, about half of total cooking
time. Season, turn, and brown other side. Use timetable (next page) as
a guide to total broiling time. To tell if meat is done, cut into it
along bone and observe color.

Use a low temperature for broiling frozen meat, so the surface does not
char before the interior thaws and cooks. Allow 1½ to 2 times as long
as specified in the timetable on page 21.


_Pan broiling ... beef, lamb, pork_

Choose thin steaks, chops, or ham slices (1 inch thick or less). Or
shape meat patties less than an inch thick.

Slash fat around edge of meat to prevent it from curling. Grease pan
lightly with fat or rub pan with fat edge of meat.

Cook meat slowly over moderate heat, turning occasionally as necessary.
Pour off excess fat as it accumulates. Total cooking time will be 10 to
20 minutes, depending on the degree of doneness desired. Pork chops may
take a little longer.

Remove meat from pan, season, and serve.


_Braising ... beef, veal, lamb, pork_

Brown meat slowly on all sides in enough added fat to keep meat from
sticking. Use a heavy pan. Meats may be floured or not, as desired,
before browning. Floured meats brown better than unfloured meats. Meats
that have a considerable amount of fat and that are not floured can be
browned without added fat.

Season the meat. If necessary to prevent overbrowning, add a small
amount of liquid (about ½ cup for a roast). Many cuts of meat can be
braised without added liquid. Steam from meat juices trapped in a
covered pan provides enough moisture. Cover pan tightly.

Cook slowly over low heat or in a 350° F. oven until tender, adding
more liquid if needed. Use the timetable (p. 22) as a guide to braising
time.


TIMETABLE FOR BROILING MEATS

  ————————————————————————————————+————————————+——————————+—————————————
                                  |Approximate |Degree of | Approximate
         Kind and cut of meat     | thickness  | doneness |total cooking
                                  |            |          |   time[9]
  ————————————————————————————————+————————————+——————————+—————————————
                                  | _Inches_   |          | _Minutes_
  Beef steaks                     |   1        |Rare      |  10 to 15
    (Club, porterhouse, rib,      |   1        |Medium    |  15 to 20
     sirloin, T-bone, tenderloin) |   1        |Well done |  20 to 30
                                  |   1½       |Rare      |  15 to 20
                                  |   1½       |Medium    |  20 to 25
                                  |   1½       |Well done |  25 to 40
                                  |   2        |Rare      |  25 to 35
                                  |   2        |Medium    |  35 to 45
                                  |   2        |Well done |  45 to 55
                                  |            |          |
  Hamburgers                      |    ¾       |Rare      |  8
                                  |    ¾       |Medium    |  12
                                  |    ¾       |Well done |  14
                                  |            |          |
  Lamb chops                      |   1        |Medium    |  12
    (Loin, rib, shoulder)         |   1        |Well done |  14
                                  |   1½       |Medium    |  18
                                  |   1½       |Well done |  22
                                  |            |          |
  Cured ham slices                |    ¾       |Well done |  13 to 14
    (Cook-before-eating)          |   1        |Well done |  18 to 20
  ————————————————————————————————+————————————+——————————+—————————————

  [9] Meat at refrigerator temperature at start of broiling.


TIMETABLE FOR BRAISING MEATS

  ——————————————————————————————————+—————————————————————+—————————————
                                    |     Approximate     | Approximate
       Kind and cut of meat         |    ready-to-cook    |total cooking
                                    | weight or thickness |    time
  ——————————————————————————————————+—————————————————————+—————————————
                  BEEF              |                     |
                                    |                     | _Hours_
  Pot roast, such as chuck or round | 3 to 5 pounds       |    3 to 4
  Steak, such as chuck or round     | 1 to 1½ inches      |    2 to 2½
  Short ribs                        | 2 to 2½ pounds      |    2 to 2½
                                    |                     |
                  VEAL              |                     |
                                    |                     |
  Chops                             | ½ to ¾ inch         |    ¾
  Shoulder, rolled                  | 3 to 5 pounds       |    2 to 2½
                                    |                     |
                  LAMB              |                     |
                                    |                     |
  Chops                             | ½ to ¾ inch         |    ½ to ¾
  Shanks                            | 1 pound each        |    1½ to 2
  Shoulder, rolled                  | 3 to 5 pounds       |    2 to 2½
                                    |                     |
                  PORK              |                     |
                                    |                     |
  Chops                             | ½ to 1 inch         |    ¾ to 1
  Spareribs                         | 2 to 3 pounds       |    1½ to 2½
  ——————————————————————————————————+—————————————————————+—————————————


Quick beef pie

_6 servings_

  1½ pounds ground beef
  1 medium-size onion, chopped
  ½ teaspoon salt
  1 can (10½ ounces) condensed tomato soup
  1 can (1 pound) cut green beans, drained
  ¼ teaspoon pepper
  1½ cups seasoned mashed potatoes
  ½ cup shredded Cheddar cheese

Crumble beef into large frypan. Add onion and salt, and cook until
browned. Drain off excess fat.

Add soup, green beans, and pepper; simmer 5 minutes. Pour into greased
2-quart casserole.

Drop potatoes in mounds onto hot meat mixture. Sprinkle with cheese.
Bake at 350° F. (moderate oven) 20 minutes.


_Menu suggestion_

Serve with buttered carrots, stuffed prune salad, and brownies.


Beef stroganoff

_6 servings_

  ⅓ cup flour
  1 teaspoon salt
  ¼ teaspoon pepper
  1 pound sirloin tip steak, cut in very thin strips
  ½ cup finely chopped onion
  ¼ cup fat or oil
  1 can (10½ ounces) condensed cream of mushroom soup
  1 can (8 ounces) sliced mushrooms, drained
  1 cup sour cream
  Cooked rice
  Paprika
  Parsley

Combine flour, salt, and pepper. Coat meat strips with flour mixture.
Brown meat in hot fat in a large frypan. Add onion and cook until
clear. Drain off excess fat.

Add soup and mushrooms. Simmer, covered, 10 to 15 minutes. Blend in
sour cream and remove from heat. Serve over rice. Sprinkle with
paprika and garnish with parsley.


_Menu suggestion_

Serve with green beans, cucumber and tomato salad, and have sliced
peaches and poundcake for dessert.


Luncheon special

_6 servings_

  2 cups medium white sauce (p. 57)
  2 cups shredded Cheddar cheese
  1 package (10 ounces) frozen cut green beans, cooked and drained
  1 can (12 ounces) luncheon meat, cut in thin strips
  1 tablespoon chopped pimiento
  White pepper, as desired
  Toast triangles

To hot white sauce, add remaining ingredients except toast. Cook over
low heat 10 minutes, or just until cheese melts and mixture is hot.
Serve on toast triangles.


_Menu suggestion_

Serve with glazed carrots, fruit salad, and chocolate pudding.


Curried meat

_6 servings_

  2 beef bouillon cubes
  1⅓ cups hot water
  1½ cups sliced celery
  2 tablespoons chopped onion
  3 tablespoons fat or oil
  1 tablespoon cornstarch
  1 teaspoon curry powder
  ½ teaspoon salt
  3 cups chopped, cooked lamb, pork, or veal

Dissolve bouillon cubes in hot water.

Lightly brown celery and onion in hot fat in a large frypan. Blend in
cornstarch and seasonings. Slowly stir in bouillon. Add meat. Cook
mixture over moderate heat 15 to 20 minutes, stirring as needed to
prevent sticking. Serve on rice.


_Menu suggestion_

Serve with italian green beans, citrus fruit salad, and spiced prune
cake.


Sausage and potatoes au gratin

_6 servings_

  1 can (10½ ounces) condensed cream of mushroom soup
  ½ cup milk
  ½ cup finely chopped onion
  ¼ cup chopped green pepper
  1 tablespoon chopped pimiento
  ½ teaspoon salt
  ¼ teaspoon pepper
  4 cups thinly sliced potatoes
  1 package (8 ounces) precooked small smoked sausages, cut in
      bite-size pieces
  1 tablespoon butter or margarine
  ½ cup shredded Cheddar cheese

Combine soup, milk, onion, green pepper, pimiento, salt, and pepper;
blend well.

Place half the potatoes in a greased 2-quart casserole. Add half the
sausage. Cover with half the soup mixture. Repeat layers. Dot with fat.
Cover and bake at 350° F. (moderate oven) about 1¼ hours.

Remove cover. Sprinkle with cheese and bake, uncovered, 15 minutes
more, or until potatoes are tender.


_Menu suggestion_

Serve with brussels sprouts, fruit, and gingerbread.


Ham patties

_6 servings_

  2 cups ground cooked ham
  1 cup mashed potatoes
  1 tablespoon chopped onion
  ¼ teaspoon dry mustard
  ¼ teaspoon salt
  1 tablespoon milk
  1 egg, beaten
  ½ cup fine dry breadcrumbs
  3 tablespoons fat or oil

Combine ground ham, mashed potatoes, onion, mustard, and ¼ teaspoon
salt. Chill about 1 hour. Shape into 12 patties.

Blend milk into beaten egg. Dip patties in egg mixture and then in
crumbs.

Fry patties in hot fat until golden brown. Serve with egg sauce (p. 57).


_Menu suggestion_

Serve with asparagus, molded fruit salad, cheese biscuits, and peanut
butter cookies.


Braised liver and onions

_6 servings_

  1½ pounds sliced beef liver
  ½ cup flour
  2 tablespoons fat or oil
  1½ teaspoons salt
  ¼ teaspoon pepper
  1 large onion, sliced
  ¼ cup water

Remove skin and large veins from liver. Coat meat with flour. Heat fat
in large frypan over moderate heat and brown liver on one side.

Turn liver, sprinkle with seasonings and cover with onions. Add water
and cover pan tightly. Cook over low heat 20 to 30 minutes, or until
liver is tender.


_Menu suggestion_

Serve with stewed okra and tomatoes, spinach salad, and apple crisp.


Spaghetti with meat sauce

_6 servings_

  1 pound ground beef
  1 medium-size onion, finely chopped
  1 clove garlic, peeled
  ½ teaspoon oregano
  1 teaspoon salt
  ¼ teaspoon pepper
  1 can (6 ounces) tomato paste
  ¾ cup water
  1 can (15 ounces) spanish-style tomato sauce
  1 bay leaf
  1 tablespoon sugar
  4 cups cooked spaghetti
  ½ cup grated Parmesan or Romano cheese

Crumble ground beef into 4-quart saucepan. Add onion, garlic, oregano,
salt, and pepper. Heat to brown meat.

Add tomato paste, water, tomato sauce, and bay leaf. Bring to a boil.
Then simmer, uncovered, over low heat 45 minutes. Remove garlic. Add
sugar and simmer 15 minutes longer.

Place hot spaghetti on a platter. Cover with meat sauce. Sprinkle with
cheese.


_Menu suggestion_

Serve with tossed green salad and upside-down cake.


Meat loaf

_6 servings_

  1½ pounds ground beef
  3 slices soft white bread, torn into very small pieces
  1 cup tomato juice or milk
  ½ cup finely chopped onion
  1 egg, beaten
  1 teaspoon salt
  ¼ teaspoon pepper

Mix ingredients thoroughly. Press into a 9- by 5- by 3-inch loafpan or
shape into loaf.

Bake uncovered at 350° F. (moderate oven) about 1½ hours. Remove from
oven and drain off excess fat.


_Menu suggestion_

Serve with green bean-mushroom casserole, baked potatoes, celery sticks
and olives, and orange sherbet.


Stuffed green peppers

_6 servings_

  3 large green peppers
  2 teaspoons salt
  Boiling water
  1 pound ground beef
  1½ cups cooked rice
  2 tablespoons finely chopped celery
  2 tablespoons finely chopped onion
  ¼ cup chili sauce
  2 teaspoons salt
  ¼ teaspoon pepper
  1 egg
  2 tablespoons shredded Cheddar cheese

Halve peppers lengthwise; remove stems, seeds, and membranes. Add 2
teaspoons salt to enough boiling water to cover peppers; boil peppers 5
minutes. Drain.

Combine other ingredients except cheese; mix well. Fill pepper halves
with this mixture and place in ½ inch of hot water in a baking pan.

Bake uncovered at 350° F. (moderate oven) 45 to 55 minutes. Sprinkle
cheese over peppers and bake 5 minutes longer, or just until cheese
melts.


_Menu suggestion_

Serve with corn pudding and coleslaw, and have your favorite ice cream
for dessert.


Saucy luncheon meat

_6 servings_

  2 packages (3 ounces each) cream cheese
  2 tablespoons milk
  1 pound bologna or other luncheon meat, finely diced
  ¼ cup finely chopped onion
  2 tablespoons sliced ripe olives
  2 teaspoons prepared mustard
  ¾ cup canned condensed cream of mushroom soup
  Biscuits, cooked rice, or noodles

Blend cream cheese with milk in top of double boiler. Add meat, onion,
olives, mustard, and soup; mix thoroughly. Heat over simmering water
15 to 20 minutes, stirring occasionally. Serve over biscuits, rice, or
noodles.


_Menu suggestion_

Serve with kale, carrot and pineapple salad, and chocolate chip
cookies.


Beef stew

_6 servings_

  ⅓ cup flour
  1½ teaspoons salt
  ⅛ teaspoon pepper
  1½ pounds boneless stew beef, cut in 1-inch cubes
  2 tablespoons fat or oil
  3 cups water
  3 medium-size onions, sliced
  4 medium-size potatoes, cut in 1-inch cubes
  5 medium-size carrots, quartered
  1½ cups frozen peas
  ¼ cup water

Combine flour, salt, and pepper; coat meat with seasoned flour. Save
remaining flour. Brown meat in hot fat in a 4-quart saucepan.

Add water and cover tightly. Simmer until meat is tender, about 1½
hours.

Add onions, potatoes, and carrots. Cover and simmer 15 minutes.

Add peas. Cover and simmer until all vegetables are tender.

Blend ¼ cup water with remaining flour. Add to stew, stirring gently;
cook until thickened.


_Variation_

_Irish stew._—Use lean lamb instead of beef. Add 1 turnip, diced, with
potatoes and carrots.


_Menu suggestion_

Serve with tossed green salad and hot biscuits. Have fruit sherbet and
cookies for dessert.


Poultry

Serve poultry often—it’s versatile, flavorful, and economical. You can
buy chicken and turkey in convenient sizes—chilled or frozen—any day of
the year. And for variety, try duck and goose.


_Preparing poultry_

_Ready-to-cook poultry_ needs little preparation before cooking.
Inspect for pinfeathers. Wash and drain poultry.

Keep _frozen poultry_ frozen until time to thaw or cook. Frozen poultry
usually is thawed before cooking, but poultry parts or whole poultry
frozen without giblets can be cooked without thawing. Cooking time will
be longer than for unfrozen poultry. Do not thaw commercially frozen
stuffed poultry before cooking.

To thaw poultry in the refrigerator, place frozen poultry on a tray or
shallow pan to catch the thawing drip; if unwrapped, cover lightly.
Remove giblets from cavity when bird is pliable.

If it is not practical to thaw poultry in the refrigerator, immerse
poultry in a watertight wrapper in cold water. Change water often to
hasten thawing. Or you can partially thaw poultry in the refrigerator
and partially in cold water. It takes 1 to 8 hours to thaw poultry in
cold water, or 1 to 3 days in a refrigerator.

Cook poultry promptly after thawing. Stuff poultry just before
roasting.


_Cooking guides_

Most poultry sold whole can be roasted. Stewing chickens and mature
turkeys, however, are more tender if braised or stewed. They are good
for stews, or to provide cooked meat for casseroles, sandwiches, and
salads.

Broiler or fryer chickens can be roasted, ovenbaked, barbecued, or
cooked on a rotisserie as well as broiled or fried. Fryer-roaster
turkeys weighing 4 or 5 pounds can be roasted whole, or can be cut into
parts and fried or broiled.

Rock Cornish game hens can be cooked like broiler or fryer chickens.
Small ducks are suitable for broiling or frying; larger ones, for
roasting or rotisserie cooking. Geese roast very well.

Roast poultry uncovered for best color and to reduce splitting and
shrinkage. Poultry can be roasted with or without stuffing; unstuffed
birds take slightly less time to cook. Cook poultry until tender and
juicy; do not overcook.


_Roasting_

Prepare the poultry as directed above. Stuff the body and neck cavities
lightly; allow about ½ cup of stuffing per pound of ready-to-cook
poultry. See stuffing recipe (p. 28). Or if desired, leave poultry
unstuffed.

Fold loose neck skin toward back; fasten with a skewer. Turn wingtips
back of heavy wingbone to rest against neck skin. Tuck ends of legs
under band of skin at tail or fasten legs together close to body.

To roast poultry, place breast side up on a rack in a shallow pan. Do
not cover pan and do not add water.

See roasting guide (p. 28) for approximate times for roasting poultry.

A meat thermometer is the best guide to doneness of turkeys. Insert the
thermometer into the center of the inner thigh muscle. Make sure it
does not touch the bone.

Salt the giblets and neck, seal them in aluminum foil, and roast along
with the poultry. Or simmer them in salted water until tender.

You can baste poultry with pan drippings or a little fat if you like.

If poultry browns early in the roasting period, cover the breast and
drumsticks lightly with aluminum foil or with a thin cloth moistened
with fat. After poultry is partly roasted, cut band of skin that holds
legs together.

Use any one or more of the following ways to tell if poultry is done:

 • A meat thermometer inserted in the center of the inner thigh muscle
 of a turkey reaches 180° to 185° F. If turkey is stuffed, also check
 stuffing temperature by inserting a thermometer into the body cavity
 for 5 minutes. Temperature should reach 165° F.

 • Drumstick feels soft when you press meaty part with protected
 fingers.

 • Drumstick moves up and down easily and leg joint gives readily.

CAUTION: Do not partly roast poultry on one day and complete roasting
the following day.


ROASTING GUIDE

  ————————————————————+——————————————+——————————————+—————————————
                      |              |  Approximate |  Internal
                      |Ready-to-cook | roasting time| temperature
    Kind of poultry   | weight[10]   |at 325° F. for| of poultry
                      |              |  stuffed     | when done
                      |              | poultry[11]  |
  ————————————————————+——————————————+——————————————+—————————————
                      | _Pounds_     | _Hours_      |     °F.
                      |              |              |
  Chickens            |1½ to 2½      |1     to 2    |
    (Broilers, fryers,|              |              |
    or roasters)      |2½ to 4½      |2     to 3½   |
                      |              |              |
  Ducks               |4     to 6    |2     to 3    |
                      |              |              |
  Geese               |6     to 8    |3     to 3½   |
                      |8     to 12   |3½ to 4½      |
                      |              |              |
  Turkeys             |6     to 8    |3     to 3½   | } 180 to 185
                      |8     to 12   |3½ to 4½      | } in center
                      |12    to 16   |4½ to 5½      | } of inner
                      |16    to 20   |5½ to 6½      | } thigh
                      |20    to 24   |6½ to 7       | } muscle.
  ————————————————————+——————————————+——————————————+—————————————

  [10] Weight of giblets and neck included.

  [11] Unstuffed poultry may take slightly less time than stuffed
  poultry. Cooking time is based on chilled poultry or poultry that
  has just been thawed—temperature not above 40° F. Frozen unstuffed
  poultry will take longer. Do not use this roasting guide for frozen
  commercially stuffed poultry; follow package directions.


Stuffing

_About 1 quart_

  3 tablespoons butter, margarine, or poultry fat
  ¾ cup chopped celery
  3 tablespoons chopped parsley
  2 tablespoons chopped onion
  1 quart soft breadcrumbs
  ½ teaspoon savory seasoning
  ½ teaspoon salt
  Pepper, as desired

Melt fat in heavy pan; add celery, parsley, and onion, and cook a few
minutes.

Combine all ingredients. Mix lightly but well.

Use to stuff poultry, or bake in a separate pan during the last hour of
cooking.

NOTE: Allow about ½ cup stuffing per pound of ready-to-cook poultry.
This stuffing may be used for baked fish, if desired.


_Variation_

_Nut stuffing._—Omit parsley and savory seasoning and add ½ cup of
chopped nutmeats—roasted almonds, pecans, filberts, or cooked chestnuts.


Braised boneless turkey roast

Place boneless turkey roast on a rack in a pan; insert a meat
thermometer in the center of the roast; cover pan tightly. Braise in
an oven at 400° F. (hot) until thermometer registers about 170° F. Or,
follow cooking directions on package.

NOTE: A 3-pound boneless turkey roast requires about 1½ hours cooking
time. If desired, uncover roast last 20 minutes to brown.


Broiled chicken

  Plump young chicken, about 1½ to 2¼ pounds ready to cook
  Melted fat or oil
  Salt and pepper, as desired

Prepare chicken for cooking according to directions on page 26.

Split chicken down the back and, if desired, cut into halves through
the breastbone. Break joints and cut off wingtips.

Brush chicken on both sides with melted fat and sprinkle with salt and
pepper.

Preheat the broiler and grease broiler rack lightly. Place chicken on
the rack, skin side down. Place broiler pan at the distance from heat
recommended by the range manufacturer.

Broil chicken 20 to 30 minutes on one side or until browned; turn,
brush with fat or oil, and broil until done, 15 to 25 minutes longer.


_Menu suggestion_

Serve with broccoli, creamed potatoes, and lemon chiffon pie.


Stewed chicken

Use a plump stewing chicken, 3 to 4 pounds ready to cook. Or, you can
stew a broiler-fryer chicken, although the flavor will be somewhat
milder.

Prepare chicken for cooking according to the directions on page 26.
Leave whole or cut in serving-size pieces.

Place the chicken in a deep pan. Add enough water to half cover a whole
chicken or to cover pieces. Season as desired.

Cover pan and cook over low heat until the chicken is tender—2 to 3
hours for a stewing chicken, 45 minutes to 1 hour for a broiler-fryer.

Cook giblets with the chicken or separately.

Serve stewed chicken in gravy made by thickening the broth, or use in
any recipe that calls for cooked chicken.


Fried chicken

  Plump young chicken, 1½ to 3 pounds ready to cook
  Salt, pepper, flour
  Fat or oil

Prepare chicken for cooking according to the directions on page 26. Cut
in serving pieces.

Season chicken with salt and pepper and roll in flour.

In a heavy frypan, heat ¼ to ¾ cup fat or oil—just enough to cover
bottom of pan. Use moderate heat.

Brown chicken pieces on one side; turn and brown on other side.

Continue to cook slowly, uncovered, until tender. Or, if more
convenient, cook in oven at 350° F. (moderate) until tender. Cooking
time will be from 30 to 45 minutes.


_Variation_

_Oven-fried chicken._—Prepare the chicken according to directions on
page 26. Cut in serving pieces. Preheat oven to 400° F. (hot). Shake
or roll chicken pieces in seasoned flour and place in a baking pan
containing hot fat (⅛ inch deep or less). Turn pieces to coat both
sides with fat. Cook chicken skin side down for 30 minutes; turn; and
cook 20 to 30 minutes longer, or until tender.


_Menu suggestion_

Serve with mashed potatoes, carrots, and green salad. For dessert have
cherry pie.


Chicken a la king

_6 servings_

  1 cup frozen green peas
  2 tablespoons finely chopped onion
  ¼ cup chopped green pepper
  ⅓ cup boiling water
  ⅔ cup flour
  1 cup cold milk
  2 cups chicken broth
  2 teaspoons salt
  Pepper, as desired
  ½ teaspoon poultry seasoning
  2 cups diced cooked chicken or turkey
  1 can (4 ounces) mushroom stems and pieces, drained and chopped
  1 tablespoon chopped pimiento
  Cooked rice, toast, or biscuits

Cook peas, onion, and green pepper in boiling water in a covered pan 5
minutes. Drain; save the liquid.

Blend flour with milk. Combine vegetable cooking liquid, broth, and
seasonings; slowly stir in flour mixture. Bring to a boil, stirring
constantly; cook 1 minute.

Add chicken, cooked vegetables, mushrooms, and pimiento. Heat
thoroughly and serve on rice, toast, or biscuits.

NOTE: Two chicken bouillon cubes and 2 cups of hot water may be used to
make broth. Decrease salt to 1 teaspoon.


_Menu suggestion_

Serve with green beans, molded pineapple and carrot salad, and apple
crisp.


Turkey-noodle bake

_6 servings_

  4-ounce package noodles (about 2 cups uncooked)
  ¼ cup flour
  2 cups mushroom liquid and water
  2 chicken bouillon cubes
  ¼ teaspoon salt
  Pepper, as desired
  ½ teaspoon poultry seasoning
  1 tablespoon chopped pimiento
  4-ounce can mushroom stems and pieces, drained, chopped
  2 cups cooked turkey, cubed
  ¾ cup shredded sharp process cheese
  ⅓ cup fine dry breadcrumbs
  1 tablespoon butter or margarine

Cook noodles as directed on package; drain.

In a saucepan, blend flour with a little of the liquid to make a paste.
Gradually stir in remaining liquid. Add bouillon cubes and seasonings.

Bring to a boil, stirring constantly. Reduce heat to simmer; cook 1
minute longer, stirring as needed.

Add pimiento and mushrooms to sauce.

In a 2-quart casserole place half the noodles and half the turkey in
layers. Cover with half the sauce. Repeat layers.

Top with cheese; sprinkle with breadcrumbs; dot with fat.

Bake, uncovered, at 350° F. (moderate oven) 30 to 40 minutes or until
bubbly and browned.


_Variation_

_Chicken-noodle bake._—Use chicken instead of turkey, and chicken broth
instead of water and bouillon cubes.


_Menu suggestion_

Serve with buttered beets, coleslaw, and have ice cream for dessert.


Chicken pie

_6 servings, 9- or 10-inch pie_

_Filling_

  3 tablespoons chicken fat, butter, or margarine
  ¼ cup flour
  1¼ cups chicken broth
  1 cup milk
  1½ teaspoons salt
  ⅛ teaspoon pepper
  ¼ teaspoon poultry seasoning, if desired
  2 cups cooked chicken, diced
  1⅔ cups cooked peas and carrots


_Pastry for top crust_

  1 cup flour
  ¾ teaspoon baking powder
  ½ teaspoon salt
  ⅓ cup shortening
  2½ to 3 tablespoons water

Melt fat for the filling in a saucepan; blend in flour. Add broth,
milk, and seasonings. Cook, stirring constantly, until thickened.

Add chicken and vegetables; heat thoroughly.

For the pastry, mix flour, with baking powder and salt.

Mix in fat until mixture is crumbly. Add a little water at a time,
blending lightly.

Dough should be just moist enough to cling together when pressed into a
ball.

Roll dough on a lightly floured surface; shape to fit top of 9- or
10-inch piepan. Make a few small slits near center.

Pour filling into piepan; top with pastry. Turn under pastry edges and
press firmly to pan.

Bake at 400° F. (hot oven) 30 minutes, or until browned.


_Variation_

_Turkey pie._—Use turkey broth and cooked turkey in place of chicken
broth and cooked chicken.


_Menu suggestion_

Serve with sliced tomatoes and celery strips and have spicy fruit for
dessert.


Braised chicken with vegetables

_6 servings_

  ½ cup flour
  1 teaspoon salt
  ¼ teaspoon pepper
  3-pound ready-to-cook broiler-fryer chicken, cut up
  3 tablespoons fat or oil
  ¾ cup hot water
  ½ teaspoon salt
  1½ cups sliced carrots
  3 cups sliced celery
  ¾ cup finely chopped onion
  ¾ cup chopped green pepper

Combine flour, 1 teaspoon salt, and pepper; coat chicken pieces with
mixture. Brown chicken in hot fat in large frypan. Drain excess fat
from pan. Add water and ½ teaspoon salt. Cover tightly and simmer 45
minutes to 1 hour, or until chicken is almost tender.

Add vegetables and cook 20 to 30 minutes longer, or until vegetables
are tender.


_Menu suggestion_

Serve with rice, lettuce and tomato salad, and fruit for dessert.


Homemade noodles with chicken

_6 servings_

  1 cup flour
  1 egg or ¼ cup egg yolks (3 or 4 yolks), slightly beaten
  1 tablespoon half-and-half or table cream
  1½ teaspoons salt
  ¾ teaspoon poultry seasoning
  Pepper, as desired
  5 cups chicken broth
  3 cups cubed cooked chicken (p. 29)
  Paprika
  Parsley

Combine first three ingredients thoroughly and form into a ball. Do not
knead. Divide into two parts. Roll each part on lightly floured surface
until paper thin. Allow dough to dry 5 to 10 minutes.

With a thin sharp knife, cut dough into strips of desired width and
length.

Add seasonings to broth; bring to a boil. Add noodles and boil 9 to 12
minutes, or until tender. Add chicken and continue cooking only until
chicken is hot. Sprinkle with paprika and garnish with parsley.

NOTE: One chicken bouillon cube and 1 cup of water may be used for each
cup of broth; decrease salt to taste.


_Timesaver_

Use 1½ cups uncooked packaged noodles instead of making noodles.


_Menu suggestion_

Serve with broccoli, tossed vegetable salad, and brownies.


Fish

Fish may be cooked by any of the basic methods with excellent results.
Fish should not be overcooked; cook only until it flakes easily when
tested with a fork. This will leave the fish moist and tender and will
bring out its flavor.


Pan-fried fish fillets or steaks

_6 servings_

  2 pounds fish fillets or steaks, fresh or frozen
  ¼ cup milk
  1 egg, beaten
  1 teaspoon salt
  Pepper, as desired
  1½ cups fine dry bread, cereal, or cracker crumbs
  Fat or oil

Thaw frozen fish. Cut fish into 6 portions.

Combine milk, egg, salt, and pepper. Dip fish in milk mixture and roll
in crumbs.

Place fish in a single layer in hot fat in a 10-inch frypan. Fry over
moderate heat 4 to 5 minutes, or until brown. Turn carefully. Fry 4 to
5 minutes longer, or until fish are brown and flake easily when tested
with a fork. Drain on absorbent paper.


_Variation_

_Deep-fat fried fish fillets or steaks._—Prepare fish as for pan-fried
fish. Fill fry kettle one-third full of fat; heat to 350° F.

Place fish in a single layer in a fry basket. Fry 3 to 5 minutes, or
until fish are brown and flake easily when tested with a fork. Drain on
absorbent paper.


TIMETABLE FOR COOKING FISH

  ——————————————————+———————————————————+—————————————+——————————————
    Cooking method  |    Approximate    |   Cooking   | Approximate
   and market form  |    ready-to-cook  | temperature | cooking time
                    |weight or thickness|             |  in minutes
  ——————————————————+———————————————————+—————————————+——————————————
  BAKING            |                   |             |
                    |                   |             |
  Dressed           |    3 pounds       |   350° F.   |  45 to 60
  Pan-dressed       |    3 pounds       |   350° F.   |  25 to 30
  Fillets or steaks |    2 pounds       |   350° F.   |  20 to 25
  Portions          |    2 pounds       |   400° F.   |  15 to 20
  Sticks            |    2¼ pounds      |   400° F.   |  15 to 20
                    |                   |             |
  BROILING          |                   |             |
                    |                   |             |
  Pan-dressed       |    3 pounds       |             |  10 to 16[1]
  Fillets or steaks |   ½ to 1 inch     |             |  10 to 15
  Portions          |   ⅜ to ½ inch     |             |  10 to 15
  Sticks            |   ⅜ to ½ inch     |             |  10 to 15
                    |                   |             |
  CHARCOAL BROILING |                   |             |
                    |                   |             |
  Pan-dressed       |    3 pounds       |   Moderate  |  10 to 16[1]
  Fillets or steaks |   ½ to 1 inch     |   Moderate  |  10 to 16[1]
  Portions          |   ⅜ to ½ inch     |   Moderate  |   8 to 10[1]
  Sticks            |   ⅜ to ½ inch     |   Moderate  |   8 to 10[1]
                    |                   |             |
  DEEP-FAT FRYING   |                   |             |
                    |                   |             |
  Pan-dressed       |    3 pounds       |   350° F.   |   3 to 5
  Fillets or steaks |   ½ to 1 inch     |   350° F.   |   3 to 5
  Portions          |   ⅜ to ½ inch     |   350° F.   |   3 to 5
  Sticks            |   ⅜ to ½ inch     |   350° F.   |   3 to 5
                    |                   |             |
  OVEN-FRYING       |                   |             |
                    |                   |             |
  Pan-dressed       |    3 pounds       |   500° F.   |  15 to 20
  Fillets or steaks |   ½ to 1 inch     |   500° F.   |  10 to 15
                    |                   |             |
  PAN-FRYING        |                   |             |
                    |                   |             |
  Pan-dressed       |    3 pounds       |   Moderate  |   8 to 10[1]
  Fillets or steaks |   ½ to 1 inch     |   Moderate  |   8 to 10[1]
  Portions          |   ⅜ to ½ inch     |   Moderate  |   8 to 10[1]
  Sticks            |   ⅜ to ½ inch     |   Moderate  |   8 to 10[12]
                    |                   |             |
  POACHING          |                   |             |
                    |                   |             |
  Fillets or steaks |    2 pounds       |   Simmer    |   5 to 10
                    |                   |             |
  STEAMING          |                   |             |
                    |                   |             |
  Fillets or steaks |    2 pounds       |   Boil      |   5 to 10
  ——————————————————+———————————————————+—————————————+——————————————

  [12] Turn once.


_Menu suggestion_

Serve with tartar sauce, baked potatoes, snap beans, tossed green
salad, and upside-down cake.


Salmon loaf

_6 servings_

  1 can (1 pound) salmon
  ½ cup milk
  3 cups soft breadcrumbs
  ¼ cup butter or margarine, melted
  ⅓ cup salmon liquid
  3 egg yolks, beaten
  2 tablespoons finely chopped green pepper
  2 tablespoons finely chopped onion
  1 tablespoon lemon juice
  ⅛ teaspoon pepper
  3 egg whites, stiffly beaten

Drain salmon; save the liquid. Flake salmon.

Heat milk. Add breadcrumbs and butter or margarine and let stand 5
minutes. Add salmon liquid and beat until smooth. Add egg yolks, green
pepper, onion, lemon juice, pepper, and salmon; mix well. Fold in egg
whites. Pour into a well-greased 1½-quart loafpan.

Bake at 350° F. (moderate oven) 40 to 50 minutes, or until firm in
center. Remove from oven and let stand 5 minutes. Loosen from sides of
pan with a spatula and invert on a serving platter. Serve plain or with
a sauce.


_Menu suggestion_

Serve with onion or pea sauce, scalloped potatoes, lettuce salad, and
apple crisp.


Broiled pan-dressed fish

_6 servings_

  3 pounds pan-dressed fish, fresh or frozen
  ¼ cup melted fat or oil
  ¼ cup lemon juice
  1½ teaspoons salt
  ¾ teaspoon paprika
  Pepper, as desired

Thaw frozen fish. Clean, wash, and dry fish.

Combine fat and seasonings. Place fish on well-greased broiler pan.
Brush fish inside and out with seasoned fat.

Broil about 4 inches from heat 5 to 8 minutes. Turn fish carefully and
brush on remaining fat. Broil 5 to 8 minutes longer, or until fish
flake easily when tested with a fork.


_Menu suggestion_

Serve with fried potatoes, spinach, grapefruit salad, and gingerbread.


Baked fish fillets or steaks

_6 servings_

  2 pounds fish fillets or steaks, fresh or frozen
  2 tablespoons melted fat or oil
  2 tablespoons lemon juice
  1 teaspoon salt
  ½ teaspoon paprika
  Pepper, as desired

Thaw frozen fish. Cut into 6 portions.

Place fish in a single layer, skin side down, in a well-greased baking
dish. Combine remaining ingredients and pour over fish.

Bake at 350° F. (moderate oven) 20 to 25 minutes, or until fish flake
easily when tested with a fork.


_Menu suggestion_

Serve with french-fried potatoes, cabbage, molded vegetable salad, and
lemon chiffon pie.


Oven-fried fish fillets or steaks

_6 servings_

  2 pounds fish fillets or steaks, fresh or frozen
  ½ cup milk
  1 teaspoon salt
  1½ cups cereal crumbs or toasted fine dry bread crumbs
  ¼ cup melted fat or oil

Thaw frozen fish. Cut into 6 portions.

Combine milk and salt. Dip fish in milk and roll in crumbs. Place fish
in a single layer, skin side down, on a well-greased baking pan. Pour
fat over fish.

Bake at 500° F. (extremely hot oven) 10 to 15 minutes, or until fish
are brown and flake easily when tested with a fork.


_Menu suggestion_

Serve with broccoli, potatoes with cheese sauce, lettuce salad, and
peach crisp.


Baked stuffed fish

_6 servings_

  1 dressed fish (3 pounds), fresh or frozen
  Salt and pepper, as desired
  3 cups stuffing (p. 28)
  2 tablespoons melted fat or oil

Thaw frozen fish. Clean, wash, and dry fish.

Sprinkle inside with salt and pepper. Place fish on a well-greased 18-
by 13-inch bake-and-serve platter. Stuff fish loosely. Brush fish with
fat.

Bake at 350° F. (moderate oven) 45 to 60 minutes, or until the fish
flakes easily when tested with a fork.

NOTE: Fish may be baked without stuffing.


_Menu suggestion_

Serve with broiled tomatoes, peas and celery, coleslaw, and fruit pie.


Topsy turvy tuna pie

_6 servings_

  1 can (6½ or 7 ounces) tuna
  2 tablespoons chopped onion
  1 tablespoon tuna oil
  1 can (10½ ounces) condensed cream of mushroom soup
  2 eggs, beaten
  ½ cup soft breadcrumbs
  6 thin slices lemon or orange
  1 package (12 ounces) cornbread or corn muffin mix

Drain tuna; save oil. Flake tuna.

Cook onion in oil until tender. Add soup, eggs, breadcrumbs, and
tuna; mix well. Arrange lemon or orange slices on the bottom of a
well-greased 10-inch piepan. Pour tuna mixture over fruit slices.

Prepare cornbread mix as directed on package. Spread batter over tuna
mixture.

Bake at 400° F. (hot oven) 25 to 30 minutes, or until brown. Remove
from oven and let stand 5 minutes. Loosen from sides of pan with a
spatula and invert on a serving plate.


_Menu suggestion_

Serve with stewed okra and tomatoes, celery sticks, brownies, and fruit.


Sardine puff

_6 servings_

  2 cans (3¾ or 4 ounces each) Maine sardines
  8 slices white bread
  1½ tablespoons butter or margarine
  ¼ cup chopped green pepper
  ¾ cup shredded sharp natural Cheddar cheese
  3 eggs
  ½ teaspoon salt
  ¼ teaspoon dry mustard
  Pepper, as desired
  2 cups milk
  Paprika

Drain sardines and cut into thirds.

Remove crusts from bread, spread with butter or margarine, and cut
bread into ½-inch cubes. Place half the bread cubes in a well-greased
12- by 8- by 2-inch baking dish. Cover with sardines, green pepper, and
half the cheese. Top with remaining bread cubes and cheese.

Beat eggs, salt, mustard, and pepper. Add milk and mix well. Pour over
bread and sprinkle with paprika.

Bake at 350° F. (moderate oven) 45 to 50 minutes, or until firm in the
center. Remove from oven and let stand 5 minutes before serving.


_Menu suggestion_

Serve with green peas, a relish plate, and orange bavarian cream.


Eggs, cheese, dry beans

Main dishes made with eggs, cheese, or dry beans are economical choices
for family meals.


_Cooking eggs_

For best eating quality, eggs should be cooked with low to moderate
heat, for just the right amount of time. If cooking temperature is too
high or the egg is cooked too long, the white becomes tough and the
yolk mealy.


Caution on Use of Cracked or Soiled Eggs

Cracked or soiled eggs may contain bacteria that can produce food
poisoning. For your protection, use cracked or soiled eggs only when
they are thoroughly cooked or when the foods in which they are an
ingredient are thoroughly cooked.

In this publication, a warning note is given with each recipe in which
cracked or soiled eggs should not be used.


Scrambled eggs

Break eggs into a bowl. Add milk as follows: For creamy scrambled eggs,
add 1 tablespoon milk for each ego; for dry scrambled eggs, add ½
tablespoon milk for each egg. For a product with uniform yellow color,
beat mixture enough to blend yolks and whites thoroughly. If you prefer
scrambled eggs with flecks of yellow and white, beat only slightly.
Season with salt and pepper.

Pour the mixture into a heated frypan in which a little fat has been
melted. Cook slowly, stirring occasionally to let the uncooked portion
flow to the bottom. Cook until the mixture is set, but still moist.

Or, if preferred, use a double boiler. Melt a little fat in the top
part, pour in the egg mixture, place over simmering water in the bottom
of the boiler, and cook as above.

NOTE: _Use only clean, sound-shelled eggs in this recipe._


_Variation_

Before cooking the mixture, add herbs, chopped onion, shredded cheese,
or small pieces of cooked bacon or ham.


Eggs cooked in shell

Put eggs in a pan; cover them completely with cold water.

_For soft-cooked eggs_, heat water slowly to simmering. Cover pan and
remove from heat. Let stand 3 to 5 minutes; allow the longer time for a
larger number of eggs or for a firmer consistency.

NOTE: _Use only clean, sound-shelled eggs in this recipe._

_For hard-cooked eggs_, bring water to simmering and simmer 20 to 25
minutes. Do not let the water boil. Serve the eggs hot or plunge them
at once into cold running water and leave until cold.

NOTE: The green discoloration that sometimes appears between the white
and the yolk of a hard-cooked egg results from a chemical reaction,
which is harmless. To help prevent this discoloration, cook eggs at low
temperature, avoid overcooking, and cool promptly.


Fried eggs

Heat a small amount of fat in a frypan. Bacon or ham drippings may be
used for flavor. Break eggs, one at a time, into a saucer, and slip
them into the fat. Sprinkle with salt and pepper. Cook over low heat,
basting with the fat, until whites are firm.

Or, if you prefer eggs with less fat, use this “fry-poach” method.
Melt a little fat in a frypan over low heat—just enough to grease the
bottom. Add eggs one at a time, pour in 2 or 3 tablespoons of water,
cover pan tightly, and steam until eggs are done. Season before serving.

NOTE: _Use only clean, sound-shelled eggs in this recipe._


French toast

_6 servings_

  4 eggs, beaten
  ⅔ cup milk
  ¼ teaspoon salt
  12 slices white bread
  2 tablespoons fat or oil

Combine eggs, milk, and salt. Dip each side of bread in egg mixture.

Brown on both sides in fat on a hot griddle—3 to 4 minutes on each
side. Serve immediately.

NOTE: _Use only clean, sound-shelled eggs in this recipe._


_Variation_

Add ½ teaspoon cinnamon or nutmeg to egg mixture before dipping bread.


Plain or french omelet

_6 servings_

  6 eggs
  ¾ teaspoon salt
  Pepper, as desired
  6 tablespoons milk
  3 tablespoons butter or margarine

Beat eggs until yolks and whites are well mixed.

Add salt, pepper, and milk.

Melt the fat in a large frypan and pour in the egg mixture.

Cook over moderate heat. As the omelet cooks, lift edges toward center
and tip pan so that the uncooked mixture flows under the cooked
portion. Continue cooking until bottom is light brown.

Fold one half of the omelet over the other half and serve at once.

NOTE: _Use only clean, sound-shelled eggs in this recipe._


_Variations_

Spread tart jelly or browned mushrooms on half the omelet just before
folding.

Sprinkle top of the omelet with shredded cheese, your favorite herbs,
or bits of crisp bacon or ham.


Poached eggs

Break eggs into a saucer or custard cup, one at a time, then slip them
into gently boiling, salted water—enough water to cover the eggs in a
shallow pan.

Reheat water to simmering, take pan from heat, cover. Let stand 5
minutes, or until eggs are of desired firmness. Remove eggs from water
and sprinkle with salt and pepper.

NOTE: _Use only clean, sound-shelled eggs in this recipe._


Poached eggs supreme

_6 servings_

  1 can (10½ ounces) condensed Cheddar cheese soup
  2 tablespoons chopped green pepper
  ¼ cup process sharp Cheddar cheese spread
  6 slices toast
  6 eggs

Combine soup and green pepper; heat. Spread cheese on toast. Poach
eggs until firm (p. 38). Place eggs on toast and cover with hot soup
mixture. Serve immediately.

NOTE: _Use only clean, sound-shelled eggs in this recipe._


_Menu suggestion_

Serve with green beans, fruit salad, and oatmeal cookies.


Deviled eggs

_6 servings_

  6 eggs
  ¼ cup mayonnaise
  1 teaspoon prepared mustard
  ½ teaspoon vinegar
  ¼ teaspoon salt
  White pepper, as desired
  Paprika

Hard-cook eggs as directed on page 37. Cool eggs under cold running
water 5 to 10 minutes. Peel shells from eggs. Cut eggs in half
lengthwise. Mash yolks with remaining ingredients except paprika until
mixture is smooth. Fill whites with this mixture; sprinkle with paprika.


_Variation_

_Ham-deviled eggs._—Omit salt. Add 1 can (2¼ ounces) deviled ham to
yolk mixture.


Baked eggs in hash nests

_6 servings_

  1 can (1 pound, 8 ounces) corned beef hash
  6 eggs
  2 tablespoons fine dry breadcrumbs, if desired
  Salt and pepper, as desired
  1 tablespoon butter or margarine

Spread hash evenly in a 10½- by 7- by 2-inch baking pan. Form six
depressions by pressing the bottom of a ½-cup measure into the hash.

Break an egg into each depression. Sprinkle each egg with breadcrumbs,
if desired. Sprinkle with salt and pepper; dot with fat.

Bake at 325° F. (slow oven) 20 to 25 minutes, or until eggs are as firm
as desired.

 NOTE: _Use only clean, sound-shelled eggs in this recipe._


_Menu suggestion_

Serve with mixed vegetables, lettuce wedges, and brownies.


Cooking cheese

Cheese, like eggs, should be cooked at low temperatures and never
overcooked.

Melt cheese over simmering water, or add it to a hot mixture. Add
cheese to a sauce after the sauce is cooked and heat only long enough
to melt the cheese. Add cheese to an omelet just before folding.

Bake casseroles containing cheese at low to moderate temperatures. To
keep cheese toppings from toughening or hardening, cover the cheese
with crumbs or add cheese just a few minutes before the casserole comes
out of the oven.

Cheese blends more readily with other ingredients and melts more
quickly if you shred or dice it first.


Spanish rice with cheese

_6 servings_

  3 slices bacon
  1 small onion, finely chopped
  ¼ cup chopped green pepper
  ¼ cup chopped celery
  1 cup water
  ½ teaspoon salt
  ¾ cup packaged precooked rice
  2 cups cooked or canned tomatoes
  1 teaspoon sugar
  ¼ teaspoon worcestershire sauce
  1 cup shredded Cheddar cheese

Fry bacon in a heavy 2-quart saucepan. Drain bacon on paper. In 1
tablespoon bacon drippings, lightly brown onion, green pepper, and
celery.

Add water and salt; bring to a boil. Stir in rice, tomatoes, sugar,
and worcestershire sauce. Simmer until rice is just tender, stirring
occasionally.

Crumble bacon and stir into rice mixture. Sprinkle cheese over top.
Cover and continue cooking over very low heat until cheese is melted,
about 5 minutes.


_Menu suggestion_

Serve with kale, fruit salad, and ice cream.


Pizza

_2 pizzas, 14 inches in diameter_

  1 yeast roll recipe (p. 59)
  4 cups shredded cheese (Mozzarella, Muenster, Colby, or process
      Swiss or Cheddar)
  2 cans (8 ounces each) Spanish-style tomato sauce
  ½ teaspoon oregano
  ½ cup grated Parmesan cheese

Preheat oven with oven regulator set at broil; leave oven door closed.

Prepare roll dough as directed in recipe, but do not allow to rise.
Divide dough into two equal portions; form each into a ball. On a
floured surface, roll out each ball of dough into a 14-inch circle.
Place on lightly greased pizza pans or baking sheets, turning up edges
of dough slightly to form rim.

Sprinkle each pizza with 2 cups shredded cheese. Combine tomato sauce
and oregano; spread half the mixture over each pizza. Sprinkle half the
Parmesan cheese over each pizza.

Place pizzas in preheated oven and turn oven regulator to 525° F.
(extremely hot). Bake 20 to 25 minutes, or until crust is crisp.

NOTE: Any of toppings below may be added before Parmesan cheese.
Amounts are for 1 pizza:

  1 can (8 ounces) sliced mushrooms, drained
  ¾ pound ground beef, browned and drained
  ¼ pound pepperoni, thinly sliced
  ¾ pound fresh pork sausage, browned and drained


_Menu suggestion_

Serve with mixed vegetable salad and fruit for dessert.


Macaroni with cheese sauce

_6 servings_

  ¼ cup butter or margarine
  ¼ cup flour
  ½ teaspoon salt
  2 cups milk
  ½ teaspoon mustard
  1½ cups cut-up processed Cheddar cheese
  3 cups cooked macaroni

Melt fat and mix in flour and salt. Add milk slowly, stirring
constantly, until sauce starts to boil. Lower heat and cook 3 minutes,
or until thick.

Add mustard and cheese. Stir over low heat until cheese softens.

Mix in cooked macaroni and heat through.


_Menu suggestion_

Serve with broiled tomatoes, asparagus, lettuce, and apple crisp.


Baked cheese fondue

_6 servings_

  12 slices white bread
  ¾ pound process Cheddar cheese, thinly sliced
  3 eggs, beaten
  3 cups milk
  ½ teaspoon salt
  ¼ teaspoon pepper
  Sage, as desired
  1 tablespoon butter or margarine

Grease an 8- by 12- by 2-inch baking dish. Trim crusts from bread. Lay
6 slices in dish; cover with cheese. Top with remaining bread. Combine
eggs and milk. Add seasonings and pour over bread. Dot with fat.

Bake at 350° F. (moderate oven) 45 minutes to 1 hour, or until set.


_Variation_

Place a layer of ¾ cup ground cooked ham on top of cheese before
topping with bread.


_Menu suggestion_

Serve with peas, coleslaw, and apple pie.


_Cooking dry beans_

Dry beans need soaking before cooking. Use 2½ cups water for 1 cup of
blackeye beans (blackeye peas, cowpeas), Great Northern beans, and lima
beans. Use 3 cups water for 1 cup of kidney beans, pea (navy) beans,
and pinto beans.

To soak them quickly, boil beans 2 minutes, remove from heat, and let
stand 1 hour. Or if you prefer, boil beans 2 minutes and let them stand
overnight.

Cook the beans in the soaking water. Add 1 teaspoon salt for 1 cup of
beans; boil gently for the time given below. One cup of uncooked beans
yields about 2½ cups cooked beans.

                            _Approximate
                            cooking time
      Kind of beans            (hours)_

  Blackeye (blackeye peas,            ½
    cowpeas).
  Great Northern               1  to 1½
  Kidney                             2
  Lima                               1
  Pea (navy)                   1½ to 2
  Pinto                              2

Dry beans will cook more quickly if you add baking soda to the water
before soaking. If tap water is of medium hardness, adding ⅛ teaspoon
soda to the water for each cup of dry beans reduces cooking time about
one-fourth. Measure soda exactly; too much soda affects flavor and
nutritive value of beans.

To reduce foaming when cooking dry beans, add 1 tablespoon meat
drippings or other fat to the cooking water for each cup of beans.

Cooked dry beans may be seasoned and eaten without further cooking, or
they may be baked, or combined with other foods.

If acid ingredients like tomatoes, catsup, or vinegar are included
in the recipe, add them after the beans are tender. Acids prevent
softening of the beans.


Boston baked beans

_6 servings_

  2 cups dry navy beans
  6 cups (1½ quarts) water
  ¼ pound salt pork, cut in chunks or slices
  1½ teaspoons salt
  ¼ cup brown sugar, packed
  1 teaspoon dry mustard
  2 teaspoons chopped onion
  ½ cup dark molasses

Boil beans in water 2 minutes. Soak 1 hour, or overnight if preferred.

Add salt pork and salt to beans and simmer until beans are tender,
about 1½ hours. Drain; save ½ cup liquid. Place beans in a 3-quart
casserole.

Combine bean cooking liquid, brown sugar, mustard, onion, and molasses.
Pour over beans. Bake uncovered at 350° F. (moderate oven) 1 hour, or
until beans are lightly browned on top and of desired consistency.


_Menu suggestion_

Serve with frankfurters or cold cuts, coleslaw, and baked apples.




Vegetables


Knowing how to prepare vegetables to retain their nutritive value and
appetite appeal is a test of any good cook. To help you improve your
skill with vegetables, here are some cooking tips—

• Boil vegetables in as little water as possible; losses in vitamins
and minerals will be less, the less water you use. Serve the cooking
liquids with your vegetables, or make them into sauces, gravies, or
soups.

• Cook vegetables until just tender, and serve them immediately; they
will taste better and retain more nutrients.

• Trim leafy vegetables like lettuce and cabbage sparingly. Use the
dark outer leaves—they are especially rich in nutrients. Remove woody
midribs from kale leaves—there is little nutritive loss and the kale
cooks more uniformly.


Fresh vegetables


_Preparing for cooking_

Wash vegetables thoroughly. Use plenty of water for leafy greens; wash
several times, lifting vegetables from the water.

Remove bruised, wilted, or tough parts; trim sparingly.

Soak fresh brussels sprouts and broccoli in cold salt water (2
teaspoons salt for each quart of water) 30 to 60 minutes to remove any
insects.


_Cooking times_

In using the Boiling Guide for Fresh Vegetables on the following
page, remember that vegetables may require shorter or longer cooking
time than given, the exact time depending on quality and variety of
vegetable. The altitude at which you live will also affect cooking
times; you can shorten the time by cutting, slicing, dicing, or
coarsely shredding vegetables.


_Boiling fresh vegetables_

Bring salted water to a boil. One-half to 1 cup water usually is enough
for 6 servings of young, tender vegetables. Older root vegetables that
need longer cooking may require water to cover. Spinach and other
greens need only the water clinging to their leaves from washing if
cooked over low heat in a pan with a tight-fitting lid. Tomatoes can be
cooked in their own juice.

Add vegetable. Cover, and quickly bring water back to a boil. Reduce
heat and cook gently until vegetable is just tender. Start timing after
water returns to boiling.


Frozen and canned vegetables

_Frozen._—Cook frozen vegetables according to package directions.
For uniform cooking, thaw leafy vegetables just enough to separate
the leaves before you put them in boiling water. Partly thaw corn on
the cob before cooking it. If necessary, separate pieces of frozen
vegetables with a fork during cooking.

_Canned._—Commercially canned vegetables need reheating only. If liquid
is not served with the vegetable, save it for other uses. (See Ways to
Use Leftovers, p. 75.)

Unless you are absolutely sure home-canned vegetables have been
processed correctly, bring them to a rolling boil. Then cover and boil
for at least 10 minutes. Boil spinach and corn 20 minutes. If food
looks spoiled, foams, or has an off-odor during heating, destroy it.


Serving boiled vegetables

_Hot, seasoned._—Any vegetable or a combination of two or more.

Before cooking, add a pinch of an herb, such as marjoram or thyme. Or
after cooking, season with butter, margarine, or drippings—or with
salad oil and lemon juice, horseradish, or garlic. Or sprinkle cooked
vegetables with herb vinegar or crumbled bacon.

_Mashed._—Potatoes, sweetpotatoes, turnips, rutabagas, kohlrabi,
carrots, winter squash.

Drain and mash cooked vegetable. Add hot milk or cream to moisten if
needed. Season with salt, pepper, and butter or margarine. Beat until
fluffy.

_Creamed._—Peas, carrots, celery, cabbage, asparagus, broccoli,
potatoes, snap beans, onions, lima beans, cauliflower, spinach.

For 6 servings, combine 3 cups drained cooked vegetable with 1½ cups
medium white sauce (p. 57); heat. You may prefer thin white sauce with
potatoes or lima beans.

For quick creamed vegetables, pour 1 can (10½ ounces) undiluted
condensed soup—Cheddar cheese or cream of celery or mushroom—over 3
cups drained cooked vegetable; heat.


BOILING GUIDE FOR FRESH VEGETABLES

                                   _Boiling
                                    time
       Vegetable                  (minutes)_

  Asparagus:
    Whole                          10 to 20
    Tips                            5 to 15
  Beans:
    Lima                           25 to 30
    Snap, 1-inch pieces            12 to 16
  Beets:
    Young, whole                   30 to 45
    Older, whole                   45 to 90
    Sliced or diced                15 to 25
  Beet greens, young                5 to 15
  Broccoli, heavy stalks, split    10 to 15
  Brussels sprouts                 15 to 20
  Cabbage:
    Shredded                        3 to 10
    Quartered                      10 to 15
  Carrots:
    Young, whole                   15 to 20
    Older, whole                   20 to 30
    Sliced or diced                10 to 20
  Cauliflower:
    Separated                       8 to 15
    Whole                          15 to 25
  Celery, cut up                   15 to 18
  Chard                            10 to 20
  Collards                         10 to 20
  Corn, on cob                      5 to 15
  Kale                             10 to 15
  Okra                             10 to 15
  Onions                           15 to 30
  Parsnips:
    Whole                          20 to 40
    Quartered                       8 to 15
  Peas                             12 to 16
  Potatoes:
    Whole, medium size             25 to 40
    Quartered                      20 to 25
    Diced                          10 to 15
  Rutabagas, pared, cut up         20 to 30
  Spinach                           3 to 10
  Squash:
    Summer, sliced                  8 to 15
    Winter, cut up                 15 to 20
  Sweetpotatoes, whole             35 to 55
  Tomatoes, cut up                  7 to 15
  Turnips:
    Cut up                         10 to 20
    Whole                          20 to 30
  Turnip greens                    10 to 30

_Chilled, in salads._—Chill cooked vegetables and marinate them in
sweet french or italian dressing. See recipes on page 53.

_With a sauce._—Suggestions for vegetable and sauce combinations
follow. Sauce recipes begin on page 57.

• Asparagus—mock hollandaise sauce, lemon-butter sauce, egg sauce.

• Green beans—quick mushroom or celery sauce.

• Broccoli—sour cream sauce, lemon-butter sauce, mock hollandaise sauce.

• Cauliflower—lemon-butter sauce, cheese sauce.

• Peas—onion sauce, quick mushroom or celery sauce.

• Potatoes—sour cream sauce, cheese sauce.

• Spinach—lemon-butter sauce, mock hollandaise sauce, egg sauce.

• Sweetpotatoes—honey-orange sauce.


Panned vegetables

Panning is a good way to cook cabbage, carrots, or corn.

For 6 servings, use 1½ quarts finely shredded cabbage or 1 quart cut
corn or thinly sliced carrots.

Heat 1½ to 2 tablespoons butter, margarine, meat drippings, or oil
in a heavy pan over moderate heat. Add vegetable and sprinkle with ½
teaspoon salt. Add 3 tablespoons water (6 tablespoons for corn) and
cover pan tightly to hold in steam.

Cook over low heat until vegetable is tender; stir occasionally to
prevent sticking. Cabbage will require 6 to 8 minutes, carrots about 10
minutes, and corn 15 to 18 minutes.


_Variation_

Add finely chopped onion or onion juice before cooking. Or add bits of
crumbled crisp bacon or diced ham to cooked vegetable.


Spinach souffle

_6 servings_

  1 package (10 ounces) frozen chopped spinach
  1 tablespoon finely chopped onion
  ¼ cup fat or oil
  ⅓ cup flour
  1½ cups milk
  1½ teaspoons salt
  ¼ teaspoon pepper
  4 eggs, separated
  ½ teaspoon cream of tartar

Cook spinach as directed on package, but omit salt. Drain.

Lightly brown onion in fat in a heavy 1-quart saucepan. Blend in flour.
Slowly stir in milk. Bring to a boil, stirring constantly. Reduce heat
and cook 1 minute more, stirring constantly. Add salt, pepper, and
spinach.

Beat egg yolks slightly; stir in a little of hot mixture. Then stir egg
yolks into remaining hot mixture and cook 1 minute more. Cool slightly.

Add cream of tartar to egg whites and beat until stiff but not dry.
Fold in spinach mixture. Pour into a greased 2-quart casserole. Set
casserole in a pan of hot water.

Bake at 350° F. (moderate oven) about 1¼ hours. Souffle is done when a
knife inserted in the center comes out clean.


Broiled tomatoes

_6 servings_

  3 large or 6 small ripe tomatoes
  Salt and pepper, as desired
  2 teaspoons butter or margarine
  2 tablespoons fine dry breadcrumbs

Wash tomatoes; cut off stem ends. Cut large tomatoes in 1-inch slices;
cut small tomatoes in half crosswise.

Place cut side up on broiler rack. Sprinkle with salt and pepper. Dot
each slice with fat and sprinkle with breadcrumbs.

Broil until tomatoes are soft and crumbs lightly browned, 5 to 7
minutes.


Sweetpotatoes in orange shells

_6 servings_

  3 oranges
  1 can (1 pound) sweetpotatoes, undrained
  2 tablespoons butter or margarine, melted
  3 tablespoons brown sugar, packed
  ½ teaspoon salt
  ¼ cup flaked coconut
  6 miniature marshmallows

Squeeze oranges; save juice.

Remove membranes from orange shells.

Mash sweetpotatoes. Blend in 3 tablespoons orange juice, fat, brown
sugar, and salt. Stir in coconut.

Spoon sweetpotato mixture into the orange shells. Place in a shallow
baking pan.

Bake at 350° F. (moderate oven) for 20 to 30 minutes, or until lightly
browned on top.

Top with marshmallows and bake about 5 minutes longer to melt and brown
marshmallows.


Hungarian cabbage

_6 servings_

  2 slices bacon
  2 quarts coarsely shredded cabbage (about 1 pound)
  ¾ teaspoon salt
  Pepper, as desired
  2 tablespoons vinegar
  2 tablespoons water

Fry bacon until crisp; remove from pan. Add remaining ingredients to
fat in pan.

Cover tightly and cook over low heat, stirring occasionally, for 20 to
25 minutes. Cabbage should be tender but crisp.

Crumble bacon over top before serving.


Stewed okra and tomatoes

_6 servings_

  1 small onion, chopped
  2 tablespoons fat or oil
  1 package (10 ounces) frozen okra
  1 can (1 pound) tomatoes
  ½ teaspoon salt
  ¼ teaspoon pepper

Cook onion in fat in saucepan over moderate heat until lightly browned.

Add remaining ingredients and cook until okra is tender and mixture
thickens, 10 to 15 minutes. Stir occasionally to prevent sticking.


Quick cauliflower au gratin

_6 servings_

  2 packages (10 ounces each) frozen cauliflower
  1 can (10½ ounces) condensed Cheddar cheese soup
  2 tablespoons fine dry breadcrumbs
  1 teaspoon melted butter or margarine

Cook frozen cauliflower according to package directions.

Drain cauliflower and place in a greased 1-quart casserole. Pour
undiluted soup over cauliflower. Mix crumbs with fat and sprinkle over
top. Bake at 350° F. (moderate oven) 20 to 30 minutes, or until sauce
bubbles and crumbs are brown.

NOTE: Two pounds of fresh cauliflower, separated into small flowerets
and cooked until tender, can be used instead of frozen cauliflower.


_Variation_

_Quick spinach au gratin._—Use 2 packages (10 ounces each) frozen
chopped spinach. Crumble 6 slices crisp fried bacon over mixture before
topping with crumb mixture.


Lima bean creole

_6 servings_

  2 packages (10 ounces each) frozen lima beans
  6 slices bacon
  ¼ cup finely chopped onion
  2 tablespoons chopped green pepper
  ½ teaspoon salt
  Pepper, as desired
  2 cups cooked or canned tomatoes

Cook beans as directed on package; drain.

Fry bacon; drain on absorbent paper. In 2 tablespoons bacon drippings,
brown onion and green pepper. Crumble bacon. Add browned onion and
green pepper, bacon, seasonings, and tomatoes to beans. Cover and
simmer gently 15 minutes.


_Variations_

_Green bean creole._—Use 2 packages (10 ounces each) frozen cut green
beans instead of lima beans.

_Eggplant creole._—Use 1 medium-size eggplant, pared and cubed, instead
of beans. Do not cook eggplant before combining with other ingredients.
Increase salt to 1 teaspoon. Cook 15 to 20 minutes, until eggplant is
tender.


Scalloped zucchini squash

_6 servings_

  6 cups thinly sliced zucchini squash
  1 cup boiling water
  ¾ cup medium white sauce (p. 57)
  2 eggs, beaten
  1 teaspoon salt
  ½ teaspoon worcestershire sauce
  1 teaspoon finely chopped onion
  ¼ cup fine dry breadcrumbs
  1 tablespoon butter or margarine, melted

Cook squash in boiling water until tender, about 5 minutes. Drain.

Make white sauce.

Stir a little hot white sauce into beaten eggs; then gradually stir
eggs into remaining sauce. Stir in salt, worcestershire sauce, onion,
and cooked squash.

Put in a greased 1-quart casserole. Mix breadcrumbs with fat; sprinkle
over squash mixture. Bake at 325° F. (slow oven) about 35 minutes.


Ham-seasoned green beans

_6 servings_

  1½ pounds green beans, broken into short pieces
  2 small onions, quartered
  ½ stalk celery, sliced
  About 2 ounces cooked ham, cut into bite-sized pieces
  2 teaspoons salt
  Pepper, as desired
  ½ cup water
  1 tablespoon butter or margarine

Place beans in a 2-quart saucepan. Add remaining ingredients. Simmer
until beans are tender, 12 to 20 minutes.

NOTE: Instead of fresh green beans, use 2 packages (10 ounces each)
frozen cut green beans.


Harvard beets

_6 servings_

  3 tablespoons cornstarch
  ⅓ cup sugar
  ¾ teaspoon salt
  1½ cups beet liquid (or beet liquid plus water)
  2 tablespoons vinegar
  1½ tablespoons butter or margarine
  3 cups sliced cooked or canned beets

Mix cornstarch, sugar, and salt. Blend in beet liquid, vinegar, and
fat. Cook over moderate heat, stirring constantly, until thickened.

Add beets to sauce. Let stand 10 minutes, if desired, to blend flavors.
Heat to serving temperature.


Eggplant casserole

_6 servings_

  2 cups pared, cubed eggplant
  2 tablespoons finely chopped onion
  ¼ cup water
  2 eggs, slightly beaten
  2 slices soft bread, torn in very small pieces
  ½ cup milk
  1 teaspoon salt
  Pepper, as desired
  1¼ cups shredded sharp Cheddar cheese

Cook eggplant and onion in unsalted water until eggplant is tender,
about 7 minutes; drain. Combine all ingredients except ¼ cup cheese;
mix well. Pour into a greased 1-quart casserole. Bake uncovered at 350°
F. (moderate oven) 25 minutes. Sprinkle with remaining cheese and bake
5 minutes longer.


Glazed carrots

_6 servings_

  2 tablespoons butter or margarine
  ¼ cup brown sugar, packed
  1 tablespoon water
  3 cups cooked carrots, cut in strips

Blend fat, sugar, and water in a heavy fry pan over low heat. Add
carrots. Cook over low heat 5 to 10 minutes, turning carrots to coat
all sides with sirup. Keep heat low to prevent scorching.


Potato patties

_6 patties_

  2 cups seasoned mashed potatoes
  1 egg or 2 egg yolks, slightly beaten
  1 tablespoon finely chopped onion
  1 tablespoon chopped green pepper
  2 tablespoons fat or oil

Combine all ingredients except fat; mix well. Shape into six patties.
Brown well in hot fat, about 4 minutes on each side.

NOTE: Leftover mashed potatoes or instant mashed potatoes, prepared
according to package directions, may be used in this recipe.


Stuffed baked potatoes

_6 servings_

  6 medium-size baking potatoes
  1 package (3 ounces) cream cheese, at room temperature
  ⅓ cup milk
  1 teaspoon salt
  ⅓ cup butter or margarine
  Paprika

Rub potatoes with a little fat if soft skins are desired. Bake at 425°
F. (hot oven) 50 to 60 minutes, or until potato is soft when pressed.
Slash tops lengthwise and crosswise. Fold back flaps, scoop out inside,
and mash thoroughly.

Soften cream cheese and blend in milk, salt, and fat until smooth and
creamy. Add cream cheese mixture gradually to hot potato, blending
thoroughly.

Stuff skins with potato mixture. Sprinkle with paprika. Return to oven
a few minutes to brown tops.


Green bean-mushroom casserole

_6 servings_

  2 packages (10 ounces each) frozen cut green beans
  ¼ cup finely chopped onion
  ¼ cup water
  1 teaspoon salt
  1 can (10½ ounces) condensed cream of mushroom soup
  1 can (4 ounces) mushroom stems and pieces, drained, chopped
  ½ cup canned french-fried onion rings

Cook beans and chopped onion in water with salt until beans are tender,
12 to 15 minutes. Drain.

Stir in undiluted soup and mushrooms. Pour into greased 1½-quart
casserole. Top with onion rings. Cover and bake at 350° F. (moderate
oven) 30 minutes, or until mixture is heated through and top is brown.


Onions in mushroom sauce

_6 servings_

  1½ pounds small yellow onions
  1 cup water
  1 teaspoon salt
  1 can (10½ ounces) condensed cream of mushroom soup
  Parsley

Peel and quarter onions. Leave very small onions whole. Simmer onions
in salted water 15 to 20 minutes, or until just tender. Drain.

Add undiluted soup and simmer 10 to 15 minutes longer. Garnish with
parsley before serving.




Salads and Salad Dressings


What better way to serve a variety of fruits, vegetables, even
meats—than in a colorful salad? As an appetizer, a side dish, a
dessert, or the main course of your meal, a salad brings lots of
goodness to your table. Salads can be light or hearty, depending on the
ingredients you choose.

Summertime salads often feature a medley of fresh fruits. Tossed green
salads are year-round favorites. Salads made from eggs and potatoes,
from seafoods, and from meats and cheeses also deserve a place in your
meal planning.


Tips on salad making

Selecting top-quality fruits and vegetables is a good start toward a
good salad. Fresh food has eye and taste appeal.

Give salad foods the best care to avoid damage and to keep them fresh.
If you prepare salad ingredients ahead of time, store them, without
dressing, in the refrigerator.

If you plan to use unpeeled fruits or vegetables in a salad, choose
those with smooth, tender, colorful skins.

See page 12 for other pointers on selecting fresh fruits and
vegetables. You’ll find suggestions for storing them on page 14.


_For appetite appeal_

Chill ingredients before you mix your salad.

For tossed green salads, tear greens into fairly large pieces. This
will give your salad more body.

Always thoroughly drain the greens you use in salads.

Vary your salad greens. Try chicory, escarole, endive, kale, spinach,
dandelion greens, romaine, watercress, and chinese cabbage.

Some salad fruits are likely to turn dark on standing; dip these in a
little citrus juice.

Drain canned fruits and vegetables before you add them to a salad.


Tips on dressings

Main-dish salads made with meat, fish, poultry, eggs, beans, cheese, or
potatoes usually call for a mayonnaise-type dressing, but some are good
with french or italian dressing (p. 53).

On vegetable salads and vegetable-fruit combinations, try french,
italian, thousand island, or Roquefort or blue cheese dressing (p.
53). Fruit salads taste best with sweet dressings—sweet french,
orange-honey, or celery seed dressing ([p. 53]).

Prevent sogginess and wilting by using just enough salad dressing to
moisten ingredients. Add dressing to raw vegetable salads at the last
minute unless your recipe calls for marinated vegetables.


Salad go-togethers

Some salad combinations are traditional—lettuce and sliced tomatoes,
canned peaches and cottage cheese. You can make a variety of salads by
sometimes contrasting flavors and textures, sometimes complementing
them.

Ingredients that go well together in salads are suggested below.


_Fruit salad combinations_

_6 servings_

• Pare and section 2 grapefruit and 3 oranges. For each salad arrange
grapefruit and orange sections on a lettuce leaf; garnish with a
maraschino cherry half.

• Lightly mix 1½ cups each of cantaloup, honeydew, and watermelon balls
or cubes. Serve on crisp salad greens. Allow about ⅔ cup fruit per
serving.

• Drain 1 can (13½ ounces) pineapple tidbits; combine with 3 oranges,
pared and sectioned, and 1 banana, sliced. Place on crisp salad greens
and sprinkle with ¼ cup chopped walnuts. Allow about ½ cup fruit per
serving.

• Lightly mix 2 cups cantaloup cubes; ½ cup fresh blueberries; and 1
large banana, sliced. Serve on crisp salad greens; allow about ½ cup
fruit per salad.

• Combine 4 peaches, peeled and sliced; ½ cup halved seedless grapes; ½
cup halved, seeded Tokay grapes; and 1 large banana, sliced. Serve on
crisp salad greens; allow about ⅔ cup fruit per serving.


_Vegetable salad combinations_

_6 servings_

• Lightly toss together ½ pound young spinach leaves, torn in bite-size
pieces; 2 green onions, thinly sliced; and 4 crisp bacon strips,
crumbled. Garnish with 2 hard-cooked eggs, chopped.

• Lightly toss together 2 carrots, thinly sliced; ½ head raw
cauliflower, thinly sliced; ½ head lettuce, torn in bite-size pieces; ¼
cup chopped green pepper; and 2 tomatoes, cut in wedges.

• Cook, drain, and chill 1 package (10 ounces) frozen mixed vegetables;
lightly toss together with ½ head lettuce, torn in bite-size pieces.


_Marinated vegetable salads_

_6 servings_

Asparagus spear salad.—Hard cook 2 eggs; chill. Drain 1 can (1 pound)
asparagus spears and marinate overnight in ½ cup sweet french dressing
(p. 53). For each salad arrange asparagus spears on a lettuce leaf, top
with a strip of canned pimiento, and sprinkle with chopped hard-cooked
egg.

Cucumber and onion salad.—Score 2 cucumbers with a fork; pare first, if
desired. Slice thinly. Slice ½ medium onion and separate it into rings.
Marinate cucumber and onion slices 3 to 4 hours in ½ cup sweet french
dressing (p. 53). Serve garnished with tomato wedges.

Green bean salad.—Drain 1 can (1 pound) cut green beans and 1 can (8
ounces) cut wax beans. Thinly slice 1 small onion and separate into
rings. Toss beans and onion rings with ½ cup chopped sweet red or green
pepper. Marinate overnight in ½ cup sweet french dressing (p. 53).

Three-bean salad.—Drain 8-ounce cans of green beans, wax beans, and
kidney beans; continue as directed for green bean salad.


Creamy fruit salad

_6 servings_

  1 package (3 ounces) cream cheese
  1 tablespoon sirup from canned mandarin oranges
  1 can (11 ounces) mandarin orange sections, drained
  1 can (13½ ounces) pineapple tidbits, drained
  1 cup miniature marshmallows
  ⅓ cup halved, drained maraschino cherries
  Lettuce

Beat cream cheese with liquid from mandarin oranges until creamy. Add
oranges, pineapple, and marshmallows; combine gently but thoroughly.
Lightly fold in cherries. Chill. Serve in lettuce cups.


_Variation_

_Frozen fruit salad._—Blend ¼ cup mayonnaise with cream cheese and
liquid before adding the fruits. Whip 1 envelope of dessert topping mix
as directed on package label. Fold whipped topping and cherries into
the fruit mixture. Pour into a 1½-quart mold and freeze overnight. Dip
in warm water to unmold.


Molded pineapple-carrot salad

_6 servings_

  1 package (3 ounces) lemon-flavored gelatin
  1 cup shredded raw carrots
  1 can (10½ ounces) crushed pineapple, drained
  ¼ cup raisins
  Lettuce
  Mayonnaise

Prepare gelatin according to package directions, using pineapple sirup
as part of the liquid. Chill until mixture is slightly thickened.

Fold in carrots, pineapple, and raisins; pour into a 1-quart mold.
Chill until firm. Serve on lettuce; top with mayonnaise if desired.


Souffle meat salad

_6 servings_

  1 package (3 ounces) lemon-flavored gelatin
  1 cup boiling water
  ½ cup cold water
  ½ cup salad dressing
  2 tablespoons vinegar
  ¼ teaspoon salt
  Pepper, as desired
  ½ cup chopped celery
  1 tablespoon chopped parsley
  1 tablespoon grated onion
  2 cups chopped cooked meat
  Salad greens

Dissolve gelatin in boiling water. Add cold water, salad dressing,
vinegar, salt, and pepper. Beat until smooth. Chill until slightly
thickened.

Whip until fluffy. Fold in celery, parsley, onion, and meat. Pour into
a 1-quart mold. Chill until firm.

Unmold on salad greens.


_Variations_

_Souffle poultry salad._—Use 2 cups chopped cooked poultry as the meat.

_Souffle fish salad._—Use 2 cups flaked canned or cooked fish as the
meat.


_Menu suggestion_

Serve with broiled tomatoes, asparagus, and have apple pie with cheese
for dessert.


Stuffed prune salad

_6 servings_

  ½ cup creamed cottage cheese
  1 to 2 tablespoons milk, if needed
  1 to 2 teaspoons grated orange rind, as desired
  ¼ cup chopped peanuts
  ¼ teaspoon salt (if peanuts are unsalted)
  18 chilled, pitted, cooked prunes
  Salad greens

If cottage cheese is dry, soften it with milk. Mix in orange rind, 3
tablespoons peanuts, and salt; stuff into prunes.

Arrange prunes on salad greens and sprinkle with rest of peanuts.


Luncheon chef salad bowl

_6 main-dish salads_

  2 medium heads lettuce
  8 radishes, thinly sliced
  4 green onions, with tops, thinly sliced
  3 large ripe tomatoes, cut into 8 wedges each
  3 cups cooked ham (about 1 pound), cut into 1-inch cubes
  2 cups coarsely shredded Swiss cheese
  Croutons (p. 56)
  Salad dressing

Wash and drain lettuce. Reserve outer lettuce leaves; tear remaining
lettuce into bite-size pieces. Combine torn lettuce, radishes, and
green onions; toss lightly.

Line 6 individual salad bowls with lettuce leaves. For each salad, use
2 cups lettuce mixture and top with 4 tomato wedges, ½ cup ham cubes,
and ⅓ cup shredded cheese. Top with croutons. Serve with dressing of
your choice.


_Menu suggestion_

Serve with garlic bread and have quick cherry cobbler for dessert.


Coleslaw

_6 servings_

  1½ teaspoons salt
  ½ teaspoon dry mustard
  White pepper, as desired
  ¼ cup sugar
  2 tablespoons lemon juice
  1 tablespoon tarragon vinegar
  ¼ cup table cream
  3 cups coarsely shredded cabbage
  ¼ cup finely chopped green pepper
  1 tablespoon chopped pimiento
  ½ cup finely chopped celery
  2 tablespoons finely chopped onion

Thoroughly mix all ingredients except vegetables.

Combine vegetables; mix well. Gently stir in the dressing. Chill before
serving.


Potato salad

_6 servings_

  ½ cup mayonnaise
  1 teaspoon dry mustard
  2½ teaspoons salt
  2 tablespoons finely chopped onion
  2 tablespoons chopped green pepper
  ¾ cup finely chopped celery
  ¼ cup sweet pickle relish
  1 tablespoon chopped pimiento
  6 medium-size boiled potatoes, diced
  3 hard-cooked eggs, chopped

Combine ingredients except potatoes and eggs; mix thoroughly. Pour this
mixture over potatoes and mix gently. Add chopped eggs. Chill several
hours before serving.


_Variation_

_Pea salad._—Use 1 package (10 ounces) frozen peas, cooked and drained,
or 1 can (1 pound) peas, drained, in place of potatoes. Reduce salt to
1 teaspoon. Add 1 cup process Cheddar cheese cubes.


Basic french dressing

_About 1 cup_

  ⅔ cup salad oil
  1 tablespoon tarragon vinegar
  2 tablespoons lemon juice
  1½ teaspoons salt
  ½ teaspoon paprika
  ½ teaspoon dry mustard
  White pepper, as desired

Thoroughly mix all ingredients. Chill. Shake well just before serving.


_Variations_

_Sweet french dressing._—Increase vinegar to 2 tablespoons and add ¼
cup sugar.

_Italian dressing._—Use ¼ teaspoon white pepper. Add ¼ cup finely
chopped onion, 1 teaspoon finely chopped garlic, 2 tablespoons sugar, ½
cup catsup, and ½ teaspoon oregano. Refrigerate, covered, overnight to
blend flavors. Strain to remove onion and garlic before serving. About
1½ cups.


Roquefort (blue) cheese dressing

_About 1 cup_

  1 cup mayonnaise
  1 package (4 ounces) Roquefort or blue cheese, crumbled
  2 tablespoons half-and-half or table cream
  ½ teaspoon tabasco sauce

Mix all ingredients.

Refrigerate until used.


Orange-honey french dressing

_About 1¼ cups_

  ¼ cup orange juice frozen concentrate
  1 tablespoon vinegar
  ¼ cup honey
  ½ teaspoon dry mustard
  ½ teaspoon salt
  ⅔ cup salad oil

Thoroughly mix all ingredients except salad oil.

Add the oil slowly while beating constantly with rotary or electric
beater.

Refrigerate until used.


Celery seed dressing

_About 1 cup_

  ⅓ cup sugar
  2 tablespoons lemon juice
  1 tablespoon tarragon vinegar
  1½ teaspoons salt
  ½ teaspoon paprika
  ½ teaspoon dry mustard
  1 teaspoon celery seed
  ⅔ cup salad oil

Thoroughly mix all ingredients except salad oil.

Add the oil slowly while beating constantly with rotary or electric
beater.

Refrigerate until used.


Thousand island dressing

_About 2 cups_

  1 cup mayonnaise
  ¼ cup sweet pickle relish
  2 tablespoons chili sauce
  1 tablespoon chopped green pepper
  1 tablespoon finely chopped onion
  1 hard-cooked egg, finely chopped

Mix all ingredients except the egg. Gently mix in the chopped egg.

Refrigerate until used.




Soups


Steaming hot, hearty soups and chowders make delicious dishes for
luncheon or supper. When they contain substantial amounts of fish,
meat, milk, dry beans or peas, they are filling enough to be the main
part of your meal. Or you can serve soup with a salad or a sandwich.


Turkey-vegetable soup

_6 servings_

  1 small onion, chopped
  2 tablespoons butter or margarine
  2 cups water
  2 chicken bouillon cubes
  2 cups cooked turkey, diced
  ½ cup celery tops and pieces
  1½ cups diced potatoes
  1 cup diced carrots
  2½ cups milk
  2 tablespoons flour
  1 teaspoon salt
  ⅛ teaspoon pepper

Cook onion in fat until tender. Add water, bouillon cubes, turkey, and
vegetables.

Boil gently, covered, until vegetables are tender.

Stir a little of the milk into the flour until mixture is smooth; add
remaining milk, salt, and pepper. Add milk mixture to soup.

Simmer, stirring occasionally to prevent sticking, until soup is
slightly thickened.


_Variation_

_Chicken-vegetable soup._—Use chicken instead of turkey, and chicken
broth instead of water and bouillon cubes.


_Menu suggestion_

Serve with a cucumber salad, toast, and cherry pie.


Hearty vegetable soup

_6 servings_

  1 cup cooked beef, cut in small pieces
  6 cups beef broth
  2 cups fresh or canned tomatoes
  1 cup diced potatoes
  ¾ cup diced carrots
  ½ cup sliced onion
  3 cups other uncooked vegetables (green peas, chopped cabbage,
      diced celery, cut green beans, chopped green pepper, sliced okra,
      diced turnips, cut corn)
  1½ teaspoons salt
  ⅛ teaspoon pepper

Combine beef and broth in a large saucepan. Add remaining ingredients.

Cook, covered, about 35 minutes, or until vegetables are tender.

NOTES: In place of beef broth use 6 beef bouillon cubes and 6 cups
water. (Liquid from canned or cooked vegetables may replace some of the
water.)

Canned or leftover vegetables may be used instead of uncooked
vegetables. Add to soup during last few minutes of cooking.


_Menu suggestion_

Serve with toasted cheese sandwiches and have fruit gelatin for
dessert.


Bean soup

_6 servings_

  1½ cups dry beans
  7 cups water
  Ham pieces or ham bone
  1 small onion, chopped
  2 celery stalks, chopped
  1 teaspoon salt
  ¼ teaspoon pepper

Boil beans in the water for 2 minutes; remove from heat. Let soak in
cooking water 1 hour, or overnight if preferred.

Add remaining ingredients. Simmer, covered, until beans are soft, about
2 to 3 hours.

Remove ham bone and partially mash beans before serving soup.


_Menu suggestion_

Serve with coleslaw, cornbread, and apple pie with cheese.


New England fish chowder

_6 servings_

  1 pound fish fillets or steaks, fresh or frozen
  2 tablespoons chopped bacon or salt pork
  ½ cup chopped onion
  2½ cups diced potatoes
  1½ cups boiling water
  1 teaspoon salt
  Pepper, as desired
  2 cups milk
  1 tablespoon butter
  Chopped parsley

Thaw frozen fish. Remove skin and bones. Cut fish into 1-inch pieces.

Fry bacon or salt pork in a 3-quart saucepan until crisp. Add onion and
cook until tender. Add potatoes, water, salt, pepper, and fish. Cover;
simmer 15 to 20 minutes, or until potatoes are tender.

Add milk and butter. Heat. Garnish with parsley.


_Menu suggestion_

Serve with crackers, fruit salad, and chocolate cake.


Manhattan fish chowder

_6 servings_

  1 pound fish fillets or steaks, fresh or frozen
  ¼ cup chopped bacon or salt pork
  ½ cup chopped onion
  2 cups boiling water
  1 can (1 pound) tomatoes
  1 cup diced potatoes
  ½ cup diced carrots
  ½ cup chopped celery
  ¼ cup catsup
  1 tablespoon worcestershire sauce
  1 teaspoon salt
  ¼ teaspoon pepper
  ¼ teaspoon thyme
  Chopped parsley

Thaw frozen fish. Remove skin and bones. Cut fish into 1-inch pieces.

Fry bacon or salt pork in a 3-quart saucepan until crisp. Add onion and
cook until tender. Add water, vegetables, catsup, and seasonings except
parsley. Cover and simmer 40 to 45 minutes, or until vegetables are
tender.

Add fish. Cover and simmer about 10 minutes longer, or until fish flake
easily when tested with a fork. Garnish with parsley.


_Menu suggestion_

Serve with marinated green bean salad, peaches, and oatmeal cookies.


Croutons

6 servings

  3 slices bread
  2 tablespoons softened butter or margarine
  ¼ teaspoon garlic salt
  Paprika

Trim crusts from bread. Blend butter or margarine with garlic salt;
spread on both sides of bread. Cut bread into cubes; place them on
baking sheet and sprinkle with paprika.

Bake at 300° F. (slow oven) until crisp and golden brown, about 20 to
30 minutes.

Serve on soups or salads or as a soup accompaniment.


_Variation_

_Cheese croutons._—Mix bread cubes lightly with ½ cup grated Parmesan
cheese before placing on baking sheet.


Creamy potato soup

_6 servings_

  5 cups raw diced potatoes
  ¼ cup finely chopped onion
  1½ cups water
  3 cups potato cooking liquid and milk
  2 tablespoons butter or margarine
  2 teaspoons salt
  Pepper, as desired
  Paprika or chopped parsley

Cook potatoes and onion in water in a covered saucepan until potatoes
are tender, about 15 minutes. Drain and mash potatoes; save cooking
liquid.

Measure liquid; add enough milk to make 3 cups.

Slowly stir liquid into potatoes; add fat and seasonings.

Simmer a few minutes to blend flavors. Garnish with paprika or parsley.


_Menu suggestion_

Serve with tossed vegetable salad, cheese muffins, and fresh fruit.


Cream of broccoli soup

_6 servings_

  1 package (10 ounces) frozen chopped broccoli
  1 tablespoon finely chopped onion
  ¼ cup flour
  3 cups vegetable cooking liquid and milk
  1 tablespoon butter or margarine
  1½ teaspoons salt
  Pepper, as desired
  1 hard-cooked egg, sliced, if desired

Cook broccoli according to package directions, but omit salt and add
onion. Drain; save cooking liquid.

Mix flour with part of milk mixture until smooth. Add remaining liquid
to broccoli. Stir in flour mixture, fat, and seasonings.

Cook over moderate heat, stirring occasionally, until soup is slightly
thickened and flavors are blended. Garnish with slices of hard-cooked
egg, if desired. Serve with croutons (see recipe on this page).


_Menu suggestion_

Serve with meat sandwiches and baked apples.




Sauces and Gravies


Sauces and gravies are not difficult if you begin with these basic
recipes. As you become more expert, you can develop your own variations.


White sauce

_1 cup_

                _Thin_    _Medium_   _Thick_
  Fat
  (tablespoons)    1       1 or 2     2 or 3
  Flour
  (tablespoons)    1         2        3 or 4
  Salt
  (teaspoon)       ¼         ¼          ¼
  Milk
  (cup)            1         1          1

Melt butter, margarine, or other fat in heavy saucepan. Blend in flour
until smooth. Add salt. Add milk slowly, stirring rapidly to prevent
lumping. Bring mixture to a boil, stirring constantly. Reduce heat and
cook 1 minute, stirring constantly. Remove from heat.

_Thin white sauce_ is used in cream soup, gravy, and in creamed and
scalloped vegetables, eggs, fish, and meat.

_Medium white sauce_ is also used in gravy and in creamed and scalloped
vegetables, eggs, fish, and meat.

_Thick white sauce_ is used in hollandaise sauce and as a binder for
croquettes and souffles.


_Variations_

_Cheese sauce._—Add 1 cup of finely grated cheese to 1 cup hot white
sauce, either thin or medium. Stir until cheese is melted, taking care
not to overcook.

_Egg sauce._—To 1 cup of hot medium white sauce add: 3 chopped,
hard-cooked eggs; 1 tablespoon lemon juice; a few drops of yellow food
coloring, if desired. Stir.

_Onion sauce._—Use proportions for medium white sauce. Brown ½ cup
of finely chopped onion in fat before adding flour; then continue as
directed above. Add white pepper, as desired.


Gravy

For a thin gravy use 1 tablespoon each of flour and fat or drippings to
each cup of liquid; for a medium gravy use 2 tablespoons of flour and
1 or 2 tablespoons of fat or drippings, as desired. If drippings are
scant, add a bouillon cube or a little meat extract to the liquid.

METHOD 1.—_Use with fat or with drippings containing only fat and
browned crusty bits._ Measure fat or drippings. Stir flour into fat;
brown over low heat. Add liquid slowly, stirring constantly. Cook until
thickened, stirring occasionally. Season to taste.

METHOD 2.—_Use with fat or drippings containing a considerable amount
of liquid._ Measure drippings; if necessary add water to make desired
amount of liquid. Heat. Combine flour with an equal amount of cold
water by stirring or shaking until smooth. Stir slowly into hot liquid.
Cook until thickened, stirring occasionally. Season to taste.


Tartar sauce

_About ¾ cup_

  ½ cup mayonnaise or salad dressing
  1 tablespoon chopped olives
  1 tablespoon chopped onion
  1 tablespoon chopped parsley
  1 tablespoon chopped sweet pickle

Combine all ingredients and mix well. Chill. Serve with fish.


Honey-orange sauce

_About 1 cup_

  ⅓ cup honey
  1 tablespoon cornstarch
  1 teaspoon grated orange rind
  ½ cup orange juice
  ¼ cup water
  2 tablespoons butter or margarine

Combine honey, cornstarch, and orange rind in a heavy saucepan. Stir in
orange juice and water. Bring to a boil; add fat and blend well. Cool
slightly. (Sauce thickens as it cools.)

Can be spooned over warm gingerbread or other desserts.


Sour cream sauce

_About 1 cup_

  1 cup sour cream
  1 tablespoon chopped fresh or frozen chives or green onion tops
  ¼ teaspoon salt
  3 drops worcestershire sauce
  White pepper, as desired

Combine all ingredients thoroughly at least 2 hours before serving.
Refrigerate. Serve at room temperature or slightly chilled.

Can be served with broccoli or baked potatoes.


Quick vegetable sauce

_About 2 cups_

  1 can (10½ ounces) condensed cream of vegetable, celery, or
    mushroom soup
  ½ cup half-and-half or table cream

Combine ingredients and heat.

Serve over vegetables, meats, or fish.


Mock hollandaise sauce

_About 1 cup_

  1 cup thick white sauce, made with 3 tablespoons flour and 3
    tablespoons fat (p. 57)
  2 egg yolks, slightly beaten
  2 tablespoons lemon juice

Make 1 cup of thick white sauce. Add a little hot white sauce to beaten
egg yolks; then stir egg mixture into remaining white sauce. Cook 1
minute over low heat.

Stir in lemon juice. Serve immediately.

Can be served with asparagus, broccoli, or spinach.

NOTE: _Use yolks from clean, sound-shelled eggs in this recipe._


Lemon-butter sauce

_About ⅓ cup_

  ¼ cup melted butter or margarine
  ¾ teaspoon salt
  ¾ teaspoon paprika
  1 tablespoon lemon juice
  2 teaspoons prepared horseradish

Mix all ingredients well.

Serve hot over vegetables or fish.




Breads and Sandwiches


Hot breads

Bake a batch of homemade bread or yeast rolls, and watch tired
appetites perk up. Surprise your family with hot biscuits or muffins.

For a leisurely Sunday breakfast, make waffles or pancakes.

Before using the recipes for breads, see the section on ingredients and
measurements (p. 16).


Yeast rolls

_18 to 24 rolls_

  1 package active dry yeast or 1 cake compressed yeast
  ¼ cup warm water (about 110° F.)
  ¾ cup hot milk
  ¼ cup shortening or oil
  ¼ cup sugar
  1¼ teaspoons salt
  1 egg
  About 4 cups flour

Dissolve yeast in water. Mix milk, fat, sugar, and salt in a large
mixing bowl. Cool to lukewarm.

Stir in egg and yeast. Add 2 cups flour and beat until smooth.
Gradually stir in more flour until dough leaves sides of bowl.

Turn dough out onto lightly floured surface and knead until dough is
smooth and elastic.

Place in a lightly greased bowl and turn over once to grease upper side
of dough. Cover and let rise in a warm place (80° to 85° F.) until
almost double in bulk, 1 to 1¼ hours. Dough should rise until a light
touch leaves a slight depression. Press the dough down into the bowl to
remove air bubbles.

To make plain rolls, divide dough into small pieces and roll into balls
about 1½ inches in diameter. Place in a shallow greased pan with sides
touching—or 1 inch apart if you prefer crusty sides.

Cover loosely and let rise in a warm place until double in bulk, 45
minutes to 1 hour.

Bake at 400° F. (hot oven) 15 to 20 minutes.

Brush rolls with melted butter or margarine after removing them from
the oven.


_Variations_

_Crescent rolls._—Divide dough into three portions. On a lightly
floured surface, roll out each portion into a circle about 10 inches in
diameter. Brush with melted butter or margarine. Cut each circle into 6
wedges; roll wedges up tightly, beginning at wide end. Place on greased
baking sheet with points down; curve ends to form crescents. Let rise
and bake.

_Cinnamon-nut rolls._—Roll dough out on lightly floured surface into a
rectangle about ¼-inch thick. Brush with melted butter or margarine.
Sprinkle with a mixture of ½ cup sugar and 2 teaspoons cinnamon. Press
½ cup chopped nuts into dough. Roll as for jelly roll; seal edge. Cut
into ¾-inch slices. Place close together, cut side down, in a greased
shallow baking pan. Let rise and bake.

_Cloverleaf rolls._—Divide dough into very small pieces and roll into
balls about ¾ inch in diameter. Dip each ball in melted butter or
margarine and place three balls together in a greased muffin tin. Let
rise and bake.


Biscuits

_12 biscuits_

  2 cups flour
  1 tablespoon baking powder
  1 teaspoon salt
  ⅓ cup shortening
  About ¾ cup milk

Mix dry ingredients thoroughly. Mix in fat only until mixture is
crumbly.

Add most of the milk and stir to mix. Add more milk as needed to make a
dough that is soft but not too sticky to knead. Knead dough gently on a
lightly floured surface 10 to 12 times. Form into a ball.

Pat or roll dough to ½- to ¾-inch thickness. Cut with a floured biscuit
cutter or cut into squares with a knife. Place on an ungreased baking
sheet—1 inch apart for crusty biscuits; together for softer biscuits.

Bake at 450° F. (very hot oven) 12 to 15 minutes, or until golden brown.


_Variations_

_Cheese biscuits._—Combine ¾ cup shredded sharp or extra sharp cheese
with dry ingredients before adding fat.

_Sweet biscuits or shortcake._—Combine 1 tablespoon sugar with dry
ingredients. Use ¼ cup butter or margarine for fat. Reduce milk to ⅔
cup. Bake at 425° F. (hot oven) 10 to 15 minutes.


Popovers

_12 popovers_

  3 eggs
  1 cup milk
  2 tablespoons melted fat or oil
  1 cup flour
  ½ teaspoon salt

Grease muffin tins and place them in an oven that is preheating at 450°
F. (very hot).

Beat eggs well in a large mixing bowl. Add milk and fat. Mix flour and
salt; add to liquid mixture. Beat until smooth.

Fill hot muffin tins half full of batter. Bake at 450° F. 15 minutes;
reduce heat to 375° F. (moderate oven) and bake 10 minutes longer. Do
not open oven door during baking.

Immediately after baking, insert a paring knife through the top of each
popover to allow steam to escape.


Cornbread

_6 servings_

  1 cup yellow cornmeal
  1 cup flour
  4 teaspoons baking powder
  ¼ or ⅓ cup sugar, as desired
  ½ teaspoon salt
  1 cup milk
  1 egg, beaten
  ¼ cup melted shortening or oil

Mix dry ingredients thoroughly. Combine milk and egg; stir in fat. Add
liquid to dry ingredients; stir only enough to mix.

Pour batter into a greased 8- by 8- by 2-inch baking pan. Bake at 400°
F. (hot oven) about 25 minutes, or until lightly browned.


_Variation_

_Corn muffins._—Fill greased muffin tins half full of batter. Bake at
400° F. (hot oven) about 20 minutes. Makes 12 muffins.


Spoonbread

_6 servings_

  3 cups milk
  1 cup cornmeal
  1½ teaspoons salt
  2 tablespoons butter or margarine
  4 egg yolks, beaten
  4 egg whites

Combine milk, cornmeal, and salt. Cook over low heat, stirring
constantly, until thickened, about 15 minutes. Mix in fat. Cool to
lukewarm. Stir in egg yolks.

Beat egg whites until stiff, but not dry. Fold into mixture; pour into
greased 1½-quart casserole.

Bake at 400° F. (hot oven) for 35 to 40 minutes or until set. Serve
immediately.


Muffins

_12 muffins_

  1 egg
  1 cup milk
  ⅓ cup oil or melted shortening
  2 cups flour
  1 tablespoon baking powder
  1 teaspoon salt
  ⅓ cup sugar

Beat egg until yolk and white are well blended. Blend in milk and fat.

Mix dry ingredients thoroughly. Add liquid and stir until dry
ingredients are barely moistened. Do not overmix. Batter should be
lumpy.

Fill greased muffin tins half full of batter. Bake at 400° F. (hot
oven) 20 to 25 minutes.


_Variations_

_Blueberry muffins._—Increase sugar to ½ cup. Lightly blend in ¾ cup
fresh or drained canned blueberries when combining liquid and dry
ingredients. Do not crush berries.

_Bran muffins._—Reduce flour to 1¼ cups. Mix 2 cups bran flakes or
raisin bran cereal with dry ingredients before adding liquid.

_Oatmeal-raisin muffins._—Reduce flour to 1¼ cups. Mix 1 cup
quick-cooking rolled oats and ½ cup raisins with dry ingredients before
adding liquid.


Nut bread

_1 loaf_

  ⅔ cup sugar
  ¼ cup shortening
  2 eggs
  2 cups flour
  3 teaspoons baking powder
  ½ teaspoon salt
  1 cup orange juice or milk
  ½ teaspoon vanilla
  ⅔ cup chopped nuts

Beat sugar, shortening, and eggs until creamy.

Mix flour, baking powder, and salt thoroughly. Stir into egg mixture
alternately with liquid and vanilla; stir nuts into last portion of
flour mixture before blending it into batter.

Pour into greased 9- by 5- by 3-inch loafpan. Bake at 350° F. (moderate
oven) 50 to 60 minutes, or until no batter clings to toothpick inserted
in center of loaf. Remove from pan and cool on rack.


Quick coffee cake

_6 servings_

  3 tablespoons softened butter or margarine
  ½ cup granulated sugar
  1 egg
  1 cup flour
  1¼ teaspoons baking powder
  ¼ teaspoon salt
  ⅓ cup milk
  ¼ teaspoon vanilla
  ⅓ cup brown sugar, packed
  ½ teaspoon cinnamon
  2 tablespoons butter or margarine

Mix 3 tablespoons fat with granulated sugar. Add egg and beat until
creamy.

Mix flour, baking powder, and salt thoroughly; add to sugar mixture
alternately with milk. Add vanilla. Spread batter evenly in a greased
8-inch square baking pan.

Mix brown sugar and cinnamon and sprinkle over batter. Dot with 2
tablespoons fat. Bake at 350° F. (moderate oven) 25 to 30 minutes.


Pancakes

_About 12 pancakes, 4½ inches in diameter_

  2 cups flour
  4 teaspoons baking powder
  1 teaspoon salt
  2 tablespoons sugar
  1 egg, well beaten
  1¾ cups milk
  ⅓ cup oil or melted fat

Heat griddle while mixing batter. When griddle is hot enough, drops of
water sprinkled on it will bounce.

Mix dry ingredients thoroughly. Combine egg with milk and fat. Add to
dry ingredients and stir only until combined. Batter will be lumpy.

For each pancake, pour about ¼ cup batter onto hot griddle. Cook until
edges become slightly dry and bubbles form on top. Turn and brown the
other side.


_Variation_

_Waffles._—Increase eggs to 3. Pour batter into hot waffle iron and
bake until steaming has almost stopped.

NOTE: For a lighter-textured waffle, beat egg whites separately until
stiff but not dry. Fold into waffle batter.


Sandwiches

Sandwiches play many roles in family fare. You can make them fancy for
teas and parties—light for snacks—or hearty for the main course at
lunch or supper.

Spread sandwich fillings generously, all the way to the edge of the
bread. Fillings should be moist, but not wet. Experiment with new
fillings, and with different kinds of bread.


Bacon-cheese sandwiches

_6 servings_

  6 slices bacon
  6 slices bread
  6 slices (1 ounce each) cheese

Cut bacon slices into halves crosswise; fry until most of fat has
cooked out.

Preheat oven with broiler pan and rack in place.

Put a slice of cheese on each bread slice. Top with partly cooked
bacon.

Place sandwiches under broiler to lightly brown bacon and melt cheese.


Barbecued beef sandwiches

_6 servings_

  1½ pounds ground beef
  1 cup chopped onion
  1 cup chopped celery
  1 can (8 ounces) spanish-style tomato sauce
  ¼ cup catsup
  2 tablespoons brown sugar, packed
  2 tablespoons vinegar
  2 tablespoons barbecue sauce
  1 tablespoon worcestershire sauce
  1 tablespoon prepared mustard
  2 teaspoons salt
  Pepper, as desired
  6 hamburger buns

Crumble beef into saucepan and brown lightly. Drain off excess fat.
Mix in onion and celery. Combine tomato sauce, catsup, brown sugar,
vinegar, barbecue sauce, and seasonings. Pour over meat, cover pan, and
simmer barbecue 1½ to 2 hours, or until flavors are well blended.

Spoon beef mixture over buns.


Fish-cheeseburgers

_6 servings_

  6 frozen fried fish portions or 12 frozen fried fish sticks
  6 buttered hamburger buns
  6 tablespoons chili sauce
  6 slices (1 ounce each) cheese

Place frozen fried fish portions or fish sticks in a single layer on a
well-greased baking sheet. Bake at 400° F. (hot oven) 15 to 20 minutes,
or until heated through.

Place 1 fish portion or 2 fish sticks on bottom half of each bun on a
baking sheet. Top each sandwich with 1 tablespoon chili sauce, a slice
of cheese, and other half of bun.

Bake at 350° F. (moderate oven) 8 to 10 minutes, or until cheese melts.


Meat salad sandwiches

_6 servings_

  2 cups ground cooked meat
  ⅓ cup mayonnaise or salad dressing
  ⅓ cup pickle relish
  ½ teaspoon salt (omit when ham is used)
  Pepper, as desired
  12 slices bread
  Softened butter or margarine

Combine meat, salad dressing, relish, and seasonings; mix well. Chill.

Spread bread with butter or margarine. Then spread 6 slices with meat
mixture and top each with second slice of bread.


_Variations_

_Grilled open-face sandwiches._—Use 6 slices bread. Toast bread on one
side under broiler. Spread untoasted side of the bread with butter
or margarine and meat mixture. Broil sandwiches until meat browns
slightly. Serve piping hot.

_Poultry salad sandwiches._—Use 2 cups of ground cooked poultry as the
meat.




Desserts


Dessert adds a touch that gives a good dinner its final, satisfying
note.

Before using the dessert recipes in this bulletin, refer to the section
on ingredients and measurements (p. 16).

Cake recipes in this publication generally need to be adapted for use
in high-altitude areas. Write to your State Experiment Station or
contact your county extension agent for information on baking cakes in
your area.

For pies and cakes, use pans of the size specified.

To grease pans for cakes, coat lightly with unsalted fat or oil. Then
sprinkle lightly with a little flour. Tip pan from side to side to coat
evenly; then shake out excess flour.

In recipes that call for greased and floured cakepans, you may use a
wax paper lining if you prefer. Cut wax paper to fit the bottom of the
pan. Then grease the paper lightly.


Pastry

_8- or 9-inch pastry shell_

  1 cup flour
  ½ teaspoon salt
  ⅓ cup shortening
  About 2 tablespoons cold water

Mix flour and salt thoroughly. Mix in fat only until mixture is crumbly.

Add a little water at a time, blending lightly. Dough should be just
moist enough to cling together when pressed.

Shape dough into a ball. Roll out on a lightly floured surface or
between two sheets of waxed paper. Fit carefully into piepan. Lift
edges and smooth out air bubbles. For baked pastry shell, trim pastry,
leaving about 1 inch around the edge. Fold edge under and shape into an
upright rim.

Prick bottom and sides well with a fork. Bake at 450° F. (very hot
oven) 12 to 15 minutes, or until golden brown.


_Variation_

_Two-crust pie._—Double the recipe. Form dough into two balls, one
slightly larger than the other. Roll out larger ball of dough and fit
into piepan. Roll out remaining dough for top crust; make several
slits in crust to let steam escape during baking. Put filling into
pastry-lined pan. Top with second crust. Fold edges of crusts under and
press together to seal. Bake as directed in pie recipe.


Apple pie

_8-inch pie, 6 servings_

  Pastry for 2-crust 8-inch pie (above)
  5 cups pared, sliced tart apples
  ⅔ cup sugar
  1 tablespoon cornstarch
  ½ teaspoon cinnamon
  1 or 2 tablespoons butter or margarine, if desired

Prepare unbaked pastry.

Mix dry ingredients lightly with apples in a bowl. Put filling into
pastry-lined pan. Dot with fat, if desired. Top with second crust.

Bake at 400° F. (hot oven) for 40 to 60 minutes, or until filling
bubbles and the crust is golden brown.

NOTE: If fruit is sweet, decrease amount of sugar; if unusually tart,
increase sugar.


_Variations_

_Blueberry pie._—Use 3 cups fresh blueberries instead of apples. Omit
cinnamon and increase cornstarch to 3 tablespoons. Sprinkle fruit with
2 tablespoons lemon juice. Bake 50 to 60 minutes.

_Cherry pie._—Instead of apples, use 1 can (1 pound) pitted red sour
cherries, water pack. Do not drain. Omit cinnamon. Increase cornstarch
to 2 tablespoons. Add ⅛ teaspoon almond extract and a few drops of red
food coloring, if desired. Bake 40 to 45 minutes.

_Peach pie._—Use 3 cups fresh sliced peaches instead of apples. Use
only ¼ teaspoon cinnamon. Bake 40 to 50 minutes.


Vanilla cream pie

_8-inch pie, 6 servings_

  1 8-inch pastry shell (p. 64)
  3 tablespoons cornstarch
  ¼ cup sugar
  ½ teaspoon salt
  2 cups milk
  2 egg yolks, beaten
  2 tablespoons butter or margarine
  1 teaspoon vanilla
  ½ cup whipping cream
  1 tablespoon confectioner’s sugar

Prepare, bake, and cool pastry shell.

Mix cornstarch, sugar, and salt in heavy saucepan. Gradually stir in
milk.

Cook over moderate heat, stirring constantly, until thickened. Simmer 1
minute longer.

Stir a little of the hot mixture into egg yolks; then stir yolks into
remaining hot mixture. Cook 1 minute longer, stirring constantly. Stir
in fat and vanilla.

Set saucepan in cold water to cool. Stir frequently. Change water
occasionally.

Pour filling into pastry shell. Chill thoroughly.

Before serving, whip cream until stiff and beat in confectioner’s
sugar. Spread over pie.

NOTES: _Use only clean, sound-shelled eggs in this recipe._

Use whipped dessert topping instead of whipped cream, if desired.


_Variations_

_Coconut cream pie._—Stir ½ to 1 cup shredded coconut, as desired, into
the hot filling with fat and vanilla.

_Banana cream pie._—Slice 2 bananas into pie shell before adding
filling.

_Chocolate cream pie._—Increase sugar to ¾ cup. Cut 1½ ounces bitter
chocolate into cream filling after adding milk.


Graham cracker crust

_8- or 9-inch pie_

  ⅓ cup butter or margarine
  2 tablespoons sugar
  1¼ cups graham cracker crumbs

Stir fat and sugar together in a saucepan over low heat until fat is
melted. Blend in cracker crumbs. Press evenly into piepan. Chill.


Pecan pie

_9-inch pie, 8 servings_

  1 unbaked 9-inch pastry shell (p. 64)
  1 cup pecan halves
  3 eggs, beaten
  ½ cup sugar
  1 cup dark corn sirup
  ¼ teaspoon salt
  1 teaspoon vanilla
  ¼ cup melted butter or margarine

Prepare unbaked pastry shell. Spread nuts in bottom of pastry shell.

Combine remaining ingredients and pour over nuts. Bake at 375° F.
(moderate oven) 30 to 40 minutes, or until the filling appears set when
the pie is gently moved.


Pumpkin pie

_8-inch pie, 6 servings_

  1 unbaked 8-inch pastry shell (p. 64)
  1 cup canned pumpkin
  ½ teaspoon cinnamon
  ¼ teaspoon ginger
  ¼ teaspoon nutmeg
  ⅛ teaspoon cloves
  1 cup milk, half-and-half, or evaporated milk
  ½ cup sugar
  1 egg, slightly beaten
  ½ teaspoon salt

Prepare unbaked pastry shell.

Blend pumpkin and spices thoroughly. Stir in remaining ingredients; mix
well. Pour into pastry shell.

Bake at 400° F. (hot oven) about 1 hour. Pie is done when a table knife
inserted in center comes out clean. Filling may be soft but will set on
cooling.


Quick meringue-topped pie

_8-inch pie, 6 servings_

  1 baked 8-inch pastry shell (p. 64)
  1 package (3 to 4 ounces) pudding and pie filling mix, any flavor
  2 egg whites
  ¼ teaspoon salt
  ¼ cup sugar

Prepare pastry shell.

Make pie filling according to package directions. Cool filling
slightly; then pour into baked pastry shell.

Beat egg whites until foamy. Add salt and beat until soft peaks form.
Add sugar gradually, beating constantly, and continue beating until
stiff peaks form.

Pile meringue on pie while filling is still warm. Bake at 350° F.
(moderate oven) 15 to 20 minutes, or until lightly browned.

NOTE: _Use only clean, sound-shelled eggs in this recipe._


Lemon chiffon pie

_8-inch pie, 6 servings_

  1 8-inch graham cracker crust (p. 65) or baked pastry shell (p. 64)
  1 tablespoon unflavored gelatin
  ¼ cup cold water
  3 egg yolks
  ½ cup lemon juice
  ½ teaspoon grated lemon rind
  ¾ cup sugar
  3 egg whites
  ¼ teaspoon salt

Prepare graham cracker crust or pastry shell.

Soften gelatin in cold water. Beat egg yolks slightly. Add juice,
rind, and half the sugar. Cook over low heat, stirring constantly,
until mixture begins to thicken, 10 to 15 minutes.

Add gelatin; stir until dissolved. Chill until mixture begins to
thicken.

Beat egg whites until foamy. Add salt and beat until soft peaks form.
Slowly add remaining sugar, beating constantly until stiff. Fold into
chilled mixture.

Pour into crust and chill until firm.

NOTE: _Use only clean, sound-shelled eggs in this recipe._


_Variation_

_Lime chiffon pie._—Use ½ cup lime juice and ½ teaspoon grated lime
rind in place of lemon. Add a few drops of green food coloring to
dissolved gelatin before chilling.


Fruit delight pie

_9-inch pie, 8 servings_

  1 9-inch graham cracker crust (p. 65)
  1 envelope whipped dessert topping mix
  1 package (8 ounces) cream cheese, at room temperature
  ¼ cup confectioner’s sugar
  ¼ teaspoon vanilla
  ½ cup chopped pecans
  1 cup canned blueberry, peach, or cherry pie filling

Make graham cracker crust.

Prepare whipped dessert topping according to package directions. Beat
in cream cheese, sugar, and vanilla until smooth. Stir in nuts.

Pour into pie shell. Top with pie filling. Chill at least 3 hours
before serving.


Spiced prune cake

_Two 8- or 9-inch layers_

  1 package spice cake mix (for 2-layer cake)
  1¼ cups drained, pitted, and chopped cooked prunes

Prepare cake batter according to package directions. Thoroughly mix
prunes into cake batter. Pour batter into two greased and floured 8- or
9-inch layer cakepans.

Bake according to package directions but increase baking time by 10
minutes. Cool cake a few minutes before removing from the pans. When
cool, frost with creamy white frosting (p. 69).


Velvety white cake

_Two 8-inch layers_

  2 cups cake flour
  1¼ cups sugar
  1 tablespoon baking powder
  1 teaspoon salt
  ½ cup softened butter or margarine or shortening
  1 cup milk
  4 egg whites, unbeaten
  1 teaspoon vanilla
  ¼ teaspoon almond extract, if desired

Mix dry ingredients well. Add fat and half of the milk; beat until
creamy. Add remaining milk, egg whites, and flavoring; beat until
creamy.

Pour into two 8-inch greased and floured layer cakepans. Bake at 375°
F. (moderate oven) 25 to 30 minutes, or until the cake surface springs
back when touched lightly. Cool cake for a few minutes before removing
from the pans. When cool, frost as desired.


Gingerbread

_6 to 9 servings_

  ½ cup shortening
  ½ cup brown sugar, packed
  1 egg
  ½ cup molasses
  1½ cups flour
  ½ teaspoon salt
  ¾ teaspoon baking soda
  ½ teaspoon ginger
  ½ teaspoon cinnamon
  ½ cup boiling water

Beat shortening and sugar until creamy. Add egg and molasses; beat well.

Mix dry ingredients thoroughly. Add to molasses mixture alternately
with boiling water. Beat after each addition.

Pour batter into a greased 8- by 8- by 2-inch baking pan. Bake at 350°
F. (moderate oven) 35 to 40 minutes. Serve warm.


Upside-down cake

_6 servings_

  2 tablespoons butter or margarine
  ½ cup brown sugar, packed
  6 drained canned peach halves
  6 drained maraschino cherries, halved
  12 pecan halves
  1 recipe quick coffee cake batter (p. 62)

Melt fat in a 9-inch layer cakepan over low heat. Sprinkle brown sugar
over fat. Arrange fruit and nuts in sugar mixture.

Prepare coffee cake batter and pour over fruit; spread evenly. Bake at
350° F. (moderate oven) 30 to 40 minutes.

Loosen cake from sides of pan and invert on serving plate. Allow to
cool 5 minutes before removing pan.


_Variations_

Use 12 canned apricot halves or 6 canned pineapple slices or 1 cup of
drained canned crushed pineapple for the fruit.


_Timesaver_

Instead of quick coffee cake batter, use a 1-layer package of cake mix,
prepared by package directions.


Cherry cobbler

_6 servings_

  ½ recipe sweet biscuit dough (p. 60)
  ⅔ cup sugar
  2 tablespoons cornstarch
  1 can (1 pound) pitted red sour cherries, water pack
  ⅛ teaspoon almond extract
  Few drops red food coloring
  1 tablespoon butter or margarine

Make biscuit dough but do not roll out.

Blend sugar and cornstarch in a 1-quart saucepan. Gradually stir in
cherries. Cook over moderate heat until thickened and clear, stirring
constantly. Remove from heat. Add flavoring, food coloring, and fat.
Pour into a 1½-quart casserole.

Drop biscuit dough by spoonfuls onto hot cherry mixture. Bake at 425°
F. (hot oven) 15 to 20 minutes, or until filling bubbles and topping is
lightly browned.


_Timesaver_

_Quick cherry cobbler._—Use 1 can (1 pound 5 ounces) cherry pie
filling. Heat to boiling and stir in 1 tablespoon butter or margarine.
For biscuit topping, combine 1 cup packaged biscuit mix and 1
tablespoon sugar. Add ⅓ cup milk and 1 tablespoon melted butter or
margarine; stir until moistened. Drop by spoonfuls onto hot cherry
filling and bake as directed.


Chocolate cake

_Two 8-inch layers_

  1¾ cups cake flour
  1⅓ cups sugar
  1 teaspoon salt
  1 teaspoon baking soda
  ½ cup softened butter or margarine
  1 cup milk
  1 teaspoon vanilla
  2 eggs
  2 or 3 ounces (2 or 3 squares) unsweetened chocolate, melted

Mix dry ingredients well. Add fat and half of the milk; beat until
creamy. Mix in remaining milk, vanilla, and eggs. Add chocolate; beat
until creamy.

Pour into two 8-inch greased and floured layer cake pans. Bake at 350°
F. (moderate oven) 30 to 35 minutes, or until the cake surface springs
back when touched lightly. Cool cake a few minutes before removing from
the pans. When cool, frost with creamy chocolate frosting (this page).

NOTE: For a loaf cake, use a greased and floured 9- by 12-inch cakepan.
Bake about 40 minutes.


Creamy white frosting

_For 8-inch layer cake or 9- by 12-inch loaf cake_

  About 2½ cups confectioner’s sugar
  ⅓ cup softened butter or margarine
  3 tablespoons milk
  1 teaspoon vanilla

Beat about 2 cups of the sugar with all other ingredients until
frosting is creamy and smooth. Beat in enough of the remaining sugar
for a frosting that will spread evenly. Spread on cooled cake.


_Variation_

_Creamy chocolate frosting._—Mix in 1 or 2 ounces (1 or 2 squares) of
melted chocolate. Or increase milk to ¼ cup and use ⅓ cup cocoa. Beat
until creamy and smooth.


Caramel-nut frosting

_For 8-inch layer cake or 9- by 12-inch loaf cake_

  ½ cup butter or margarine
  1 cup brown sugar, packed
  ¼ cup milk
  2 cups confectioner’s sugar
  ⅔ cup finely chopped pecans or walnuts
  ½ teaspoon vanilla
  Nut halves, as desired

Combine, fat, brown sugar, and milk. Cook over medium heat, stirring
constantly, only until mixture boils and sugar is dissolved. Cool
slightly.

Beat confectioner’s sugar into cooked mixture until frosting reaches
spreading consistency. Add chopped nuts and vanilla; mix well.

Spread on cooled cake. Garnish with nut halves.


Orange bavarian cream

_6 servings_

  1 tablespoon unflavored gelatin
  ¼ cup cold water
  ¾ cup orange juice
  2 tablespoons lemon juice
  ½ teaspoon grated orange rind
  ⅓ cup sugar
  ¼ teaspoon salt
  1 cup whipping cream
  1 cup fresh orange sections, cut in pieces

Soften gelatin in water. Combine fruit juices, orange rind, sugar, and
salt; heat to simmering. Dissolve gelatin in hot mixture. Chill until
mixture begins to thicken.

Whip cream only until stiff. Fold whipped cream and orange sections
into gelatin mixture. Pour into a 1-quart mold and chill until firm.


Oatmeal cookies

_3 to 4 dozen cookies_

  1 cup flour
  1¼ teaspoons baking powder
  ½ teaspoon baking soda
  ½ teaspoon salt
  ½ cup shortening
  1 cup brown sugar, packed
  1 egg
  ¾ teaspoon vanilla
  1½ cups quick-cooking rolled oats

Mix flour, baking powder, soda, and salt. Beat shortening and sugar
until creamy. Beat in egg and vanilla. Blend in flour mixture. Stir in
rolled oats. Chill.

Shape dough into balls about 1 inch in diameter. Place about 2 inches
apart on an ungreased baking sheet. Bake at 350° F. (moderate oven) 10
to 15 minutes.

Remove from baking sheet while warm.


_Variations_

_Raisin-oatmeal cookies._—Add ½ cup raisins with the oats.

_Coconut- or nut-oatmeal cookies._—Add ½ cup flaked coconut or ½ cup
chopped nuts with the oats.

_Orange-oatmeal cookies._—Add 2 tablespoons orange juice and 1 teaspoon
grated orange rind to shortening and sugar mixture. Add ½ cup raisins
and ½ cup chopped nuts with the oats. Chill dough thoroughly; drop from
teaspoon onto baking sheet.


Peanut butter cookies

_4 to 5 dozen cookies_

  1 cup shortening
  1 cup peanut butter
  1 cup granulated sugar
  1 cup brown sugar, packed
  2 eggs
  1 teaspoon vanilla
  2½ cups flour
  ½ teaspoon salt
  ¾ teaspoon baking soda
  ½ teaspoon baking powder

Beat shortening and peanut butter until creamy. Gradually add sugars,
beating thoroughly after each addition. Beat in eggs and vanilla.

Mix remaining ingredients and blend into peanut butter mixture. Shape
dough into balls about 1 inch in diameter. Place about 2 inches apart
on an ungreased baking sheet. Flatten each cookie. Criss-cross top of
each cookie with a fork, if desired.

Bake at 375° F. (moderate oven) 10 to 15 minutes.

Remove from baking sheet while warm.


_Variation_

_Top-hat cookies._—Roll balls of dough in granulated sugar before
placing on baking sheet. Do not flatten. Bake 10 minutes; then remove
from oven and press a milk chocolate candy kiss into center of each
cookie. Return to oven and bake 2 to 5 minutes longer, or until cookies
are done.


Molasses snaps

_3 to 4 dozen cookies_

  ¾ cup shortening
  1 cup brown sugar, packed
  2 eggs
  ¼ cup molasses
  2¼ cups flour
  2 teaspoons baking soda
  ½ teaspoon salt
  ½ teaspoon cloves
  1 teaspoon cinnamon
  1 teaspoon ginger
  ½ cup chopped nuts, if desired
  ½ cup raisins, if desired

Beat shortening and sugar until creamy. Beat in eggs and molasses.

Mix dry ingredients and stir in raisins and nuts, if used. Stir flour
mixture into molasses mixture.

Drop dough from a teaspoon onto a lightly greased baking sheet; space
cookies about 2 inches apart. Bake at 375° F. (moderate oven) 10 to 12
minutes, or until set but not hard.

Remove from baking sheet while warm.


Chocolate sparkles

_5 to 6 dozen cookies_

  1 cup softened butter or margarine
  1¼ cups sugar
  2 eggs
  2 ounces (2 squares) unsweetened chocolate, melted
  ½ teaspoon vanilla
  2⅔ cups flour
  2 teaspoons cream of tartar
  1 teaspoon baking soda
  ½ teaspoon salt
  ¼ cup sugar

Beat fat and 1¼ cups sugar until creamy. Beat in eggs; add melted
chocolate and vanilla.

Mix flour, cream of tartar, soda, and salt. Stir into chocolate
mixture; blend well. Chill dough.

Shape dough into balls about 1 inch in diameter. Roll balls in ¼ cup
sugar and place about 2 inches apart on an ungreased baking sheet. Bake
at 400° F. (hot oven) 8 to 10 minutes.

Remove from baking sheet while warm.


_Variations_

_Cinnamon-sugar cookies._—Omit chocolate. Roll balls of dough in a
mixture of ¼ cup sugar and 1 tablespoon cinnamon; bake as directed.

_Chocolate chip cookies._—In place of 1½ cups granulated sugar, use ½
cup granulated sugar and 1 cup brown sugar. Beat sugars with butter or
margarine. Omit the chocolate. Stir ⅔ cup chopped nuts and 1 package
(12 ounces) chocolate chips into the dough. Drop dough from a teaspoon
onto an ungreased baking sheet and bake as directed.


Apple crisp

_6 servings_

  2 tablespoons granulated sugar
  ¼ teaspoon cinnamon
  4 cups pared, sliced tart apples
  ¼ cup water
  ½ cup flour
  ⅛ teaspoon salt
  ¼ teaspoon cinnamon
  ¼ teaspoon nutmeg
  ⅓ cup brown sugar, packed
  3 tablespoons softened butter or margarine

Mix granulated sugar with ¼ teaspoon cinnamon; sprinkle over apples and
mix lightly. Spread apples in a greased 8- by 8- by 2-inch baking pan.
Sprinkle with the water.

Blend flour, salt, cinnamon, nutmeg, and brown sugar. Mix in fat to
make a crumbly mixture. Spread over apples. Bake uncovered at 350° F.
(moderate oven) 40 minutes or until lightly browned and apples are
tender.


Baked apples

_6 servings_

  6 large baking apples
  6 tablespoons sugar
  2 tablespoons butter or margarine
  Cinnamon, as desired
  ½ cup water

Wash and core apples. Pare apples one-third of the way down or slit the
skin around the apple about half-way down.

Place apples in a baking dish. Put sugar and butter or margarine in the
center of each apple. Sprinkle with cinnamon. Pour the water around
apples to prevent sticking.

Bake uncovered at 400° F. (hot oven) until tender, 45 minutes to 1 hour.


_Variation_

_Cranberry-baked apples._—Omit the sugar, fat, and cinnamon. Combine
¾ cup chopped raw cranberries, ½ cup sugar, and 3 tablespoons chopped
nuts. Stuff apples with this mixture before baking.


Brownies

_16 brownies_

  2 ounces (2 squares) unsweetened chocolate
  ⅓ cup shortening or oil
  1 cup sugar
  2 eggs, slightly beaten
  1 teaspoon vanilla
  ⅔ cup flour
  ½ teaspoon baking powder
  ½ teaspoon salt
  ½ cup chopped nuts

Melt chocolate and fat together over low heat. Cool slightly. Mix sugar
with eggs.

Stir chocolate mixture into eggs gradually. Add vanilla.

Mix dry ingredients, stir in nuts, and add to chocolate mixture.

Spread batter in a greased 8-inch square baking pan. Bake at 350° F.
(moderate oven) 25 to 30 minutes or until crust is shiny and brownies
begin to shrink from pan. Cool in pan. Cut into 2-inch squares.


_Variation_

_Chewy brownies._—Follow directions above, but omit baking powder.


Baked custard

_6 servings_

  4 eggs, slightly beaten
  ⅓ cup sugar
  ¼ teaspoon salt
  3 cups hot milk
  1 teaspoon vanilla
  Nutmeg, as desired

Combine eggs, sugar, and salt. Stir in the milk gradually. Add vanilla.

Pour into custard cups. Sprinkle with nutmeg. Set cups in a pan of hot
water.

Bake at 325° F. (slow oven) 30 to 40 minutes, or until the tip of a
knife inserted in the center comes out clean.


Raisin-nut bread pudding

_6 servings_

  2 cups milk
  1 tablespoon butter or margarine
  ¼ cup brown sugar, packed
  1 teaspoon cinnamon
  ½ teaspoon nutmeg
  ½ teaspoon vanilla
  2 egg yolks, slightly beaten
  4 slices bread, cut in 1-inch cubes
  ½ cup raisins
  ½ cup slivered almonds
  2 egg whites
  ¼ teaspoon salt

Heat milk. Stir in fat, sugar, cinnamon, nutmeg, and vanilla.

Stir a little of the milk mixture into egg yolks; then stir yolks into
rest of milk mixture. Add bread cubes, raisins, and half the nuts.

Beat egg whites until foamy. Add salt and beat until stiff but not
dry. Fold egg whites into pudding mixture. Pour into greased 1-quart
casserole. Sprinkle top with rest of nuts. Place casserole in pan of
hot water.

Bake at 325° F. (slow oven) 1¼ to 1½ hours, or until the tip of a knife
inserted in the center comes out clean.


Quick ice cream desserts

_Pecan balls._—Toast pecans by spreading 1½ cups in a shallow pan,
and baking at 300° F. (slow oven) 15 to 20 minutes, or until lightly
browned. Cool and chop. Shape 1 quart ice cream into 6 balls. Roll
balls in pecans. Place on a tray covered with wax paper and return
to freezer until firm. Just before serving, top balls with hot fudge
sauce. Makes 6 servings.

_Snowballs._—Shape 1 quart ice cream into 6 balls. Roll balls in ½ cup
flaked coconut. Return balls to freezer as directed above. Makes 6
servings.

_Ice cream sandwiches._—Slice 1 quart ice cream into 6 slices. Place
each slice between 2 graham crackers (plain, cinnamon-flavored, or
chocolate-coated). Serve immediately or return to freezer until time to
serve. Makes 6 sandwiches.

_Buttered nut sundae._—Add ½ cup chopped pecans or walnuts to 2
tablespoons melted butter or margarine in a frypan. Toast nuts over low
heat for 15 to 20 minutes, stirring as needed, until they are lightly
browned. Stir in ¼ cup brown sugar (packed) and ¼ cup water; simmer 2
minutes. Pour warm sauce over ice cream. Makes about ¾ cup or enough
for 6 sundaes.


Ways to Use Leftovers


Don’t throw good leftover food away. Use your cooking skill—and your
imagination—to make leftovers tasty.

Some leftovers make good second meals merely by reheating. Others are
better prepared in a new way—with seasonings, sauces, crisp toppings.
Try leftover fruit in muffins, vegetables in omelets. Substitute 2
leftover egg yolks for 1 whole egg in baked custard. And soups often
become richer, more delicious when leftovers are added.

Listed below are some of the ways in which leftovers may be used.


Egg yolks, in—

  Baked custard
  Cakes, cookies
  Homemade noodles
  Mock hollandaise sauce
  Scrambled eggs


Egg whites, in—

  Cakes
  Meringue
  Souffles


Hard-cooked egg or yolk, in—

  Casseroles
  Egg sauce
  Garnish
  Salads
  Sandwiches
  Thousand island dressing


Buttermilk, in—

  Cakes, cookies
  Quick breads


Sour cream, in—

  Beef stroganoff
  Cakes, cookies
  Salad dressings
  Sauce for vegetables


Cooked meats, poultry, fish, in—

  Casseroles
  Creamed foods
  Curries
  Hash
  Patties
  Potpies
  Salads
  Sandwiches


Meat or poultry drippings and broth, in—

  Gravies
  Sauces
  Soups
  Stews


Cooked potatoes, in—

  Fried or creamed potatoes
  Meat or potato patties
  Meat-pie topping
  Potatoes in cheese sauce
  Salads
  Soups, stews, or chowders


Cooked snap beans, lima beans, corn, peas, carrots, in—

  Casseroles
  Creamed dishes
  Meat, poultry, or fish pies
  Salads
  Sauces
  Scalloped vegetables
  Soups
  Stews
  Vegetables in cheese sauce


Cooked leafy vegetables, chopped, in—

  Creamed or scalloped vegetables
  Omelets
  Souffles
  Soups


Vegetable cooking liquids, in—

  Gravies
  Sauces
  Soups
  Stews


Cooked or canned fruits, in—

  Fruit cups
  Fruit sauces
  Gelatin desserts
  Prune cake
  Quick breads
  Salads
  Shortcake
  Upside-down cake
  Yeast breads


Fruit cooking liquids or fruit sirups, in—

  Fruit cups
  Fruit sauces
  Fruit drinks
  Gelatin mixtures
  Tapioca puddings


Cooked wheat, oat, or corn cereals, in—

  Fried cereal
  Meat loaf or patties
  Souffles
  Sweet puddings


Cooked rice, noodles, macaroni, spaghetti, in—

  Baked macaroni and cheese
  Casseroles
  Macaroni salad
  Meat or cheese loaf
  Spanish rice


Bread, in—

  Bread pudding
  Croutons
  Dry crumbs for breading meat, poultry, or fish
  Fondues
  French toast
  Meat loaf, salmon loaf
  Sardine puff
  Stuffings


Cookies or unfrosted cake, in—

  Crumb crust for pies
  Ice cream sandwiches
  Refrigerator cake (cake strips or cookies layered with pudding or
      whipped cream and chilled)
  Toasted cake slices, served with fruit or ice cream




Cooking Terms


  =Bake=         To cook in an oven or oven-type appliance in a
                      covered or uncovered container.

  =Barbecue=     To roast slowly on a spit or rack, usually basting
                      with a highly seasoned sauce. Also, foods cooked
                      in or served with barbecue sauce.

  =Baste=        To pour melted fat, drippings, or other liquid over
                      food to moisten it during cooking.

  =Boil=         To cook in water or other liquid at boiling
                      temperature (212° F. at sea level). Bubbles rise
                      continually and break on the surface.

  =Braise=       To cook meat or poultry slowly in steam from meat
                      juices or added liquid trapped and held in a
                      covered pan. Meat may be browned in a small amount
                      of fat before braising.

  =Broil=        To cook uncovered on a rack placed directly under
                      heat or over an open fire.
                        _Pan broil._—To cook in uncovered pan over
                      direct heat, pouring fat off as it accumulates.

  =Caramelize=   To heat sugar or food containing sugar until a brown
                      color and characteristic flavor develop.

  =Fold=         To combine two mixtures (or two ingredients such as
                      beaten egg white and sugar) by gently cutting down
                      through mixture, turning over, and repeating until
                      well mixed.

  =Fry=          To cook in fat without water, uncovered.
                        _Pan-fry or saute._—To cook in frypan in a
                      small amount of fat.
                        _Deep-fry or french-fry._—To cook in a deep
                      kettle, in enough fat to cover or float food.

  =Grill=        Same as broil.

  =Knead=        To press, stretch, and fold dough or other mixture
                      to make it elastic or smooth. Bread dough becomes
                      elastic; fondant becomes smooth and satiny.

  =Marinate=     To let foods stand in a liquid (usually mixture of
                      oil with vinegar or lemon juice) to add flavor or
                      to make more tender.

  =Parboil=      To boil until partly cooked.

  =Poach=        To simmer gently in liquid so food retains its shape.

  =Pot-roast=    To cook large cuts of meat by braising.

  =Reconstitute= To restore concentrated food—such as frozen orange
                      juice or dry milk—to its original state, usually
                      by adding water.

  =Rehydrate=    To soak or cook dried foods to restore the water
                      lost in drying.

  =Roast=        To cook in heated air—usually in an oven—without
                      water, uncovered.

  =Simmer=       To cook in liquid just below the boiling point, at
                      temperatures of 185° to 210° F. Bubbles form
                      slowly and break below the surface.

  =Steam=        To cook food in steam, with or without pressure.
                      Food is steamed in a covered container on a rack
                      or in a perforated pan over boiling water.

  =Stew=         To cook in liquid, just below the boiling point.




Index to Recipes


  Page

  Apple(s):
    baked, 72
    crisp, 72
    pie, 64


  Barbecued beef sandwiches, 63

  Bean(s):
    Boston baked, 41
    green:
      creole, 46
      ham-seasoned, 47
      mushroom casserole, 48
    lima, creole, 46
    salads, marinated, 50
    soup, 55

  Beef:
    braised, 21
    broiled, 18
    liver and onions, braised, 24
    loaf, 25
    pan-broiled, 20
    pie, quick, 22
    pot roast, 21
    roast, 18
    stew, 26
    stroganoff, 22
    (_See also_ Sandwiches.)

  Beets, Harvard, 47

  Biscuit(s):
    cheese, 60
    plain, 60
    sweet (shortcake), 60

  Bread(s):
    coffee cake, quick, 62
    cornbread, 60
    croutons, 56
    french toast, 37
    nut bread, 61
    pancakes, 62
    popovers, 60
    pudding, raisin-nut, 73
    spoonbread, 61
    waffles, 62
    (_See also_ Biscuits, Muffins, Rolls, Sandwiches.)


  Cabbage, hungarian, 45

  Cake(s):
    chocolate, 69
    coffee, quick, 62
    frosting:
      caramel-nut, 69
      chocolate, creamy, 69
      white, creamy, 69
    spiced prune, 67
    upside-down, 68
    velvety white, 67

  Carrots, glazed, 47

  Cauliflower au gratin, quick, 46

  Cheese:
    baked fondue, 40
    biscuits, 60
    burgers, fish, 63
    croutons, 56
    pizza, 40
    salad dressing, Roquefort (blue), 53
    sauce with macaroni, 40
    with spanish rice, 39

  Cherry:
    cobbler, 68
    cobbler, quick, 69
    pie, 65

  Chicken:
    a la king, 30
    braised, with vegetables, 31
    broiled, 29
    fried, 29
    noodle bake, 30
    oven-fried, 29
    pie, 31
    roast, 27
    stewed, 29
    vegetable soup, 54
    with homemade noodles, 32

  Chowder. (_See_ Soup.)

  Coleslaw, 52

  Cookies:
    brownies, chewy, 72
    brownies, plain, 72
    chocolate chip, 71
    chocolate sparkles, 71
    cinnamon-sugar, 71
    molasses snaps, 71
    oatmeal:
      coconut or nut, 70
      orange, 70
      plain, 70
      raisin, 70
    peanut butter, 70
    top hat, 71

  Corn muffins, 61

  Cornbread, 60

  Cranberry-baked apples, 72

  Croutons, 56

  Custard, baked, 73


  Desserts:
    apple crisp, 72
    apples, baked, 72
    bavarian cream, orange, 70
    cobbler, cherry, 68
    raisin-nut bread pudding, 73
    (_See also_ Cakes, Cookies, Custard, Ice Cream Desserts, Pies.)

  Duck, roast, 27


  Eggplant:
    casserole, 47
    creole, 46

  Egg(s):
    baked in hash nests, 39
    deviled:
      ham, 38
      plain, 38
    french toast, 37
    fried, 37
    in shell:
      hard-cooked, 37
      soft-cooked, 37
    omelet, plain (french), 38
    poached, 38
    poached, supreme, 38
    sauce, 57
    scrambled, 36


  Fish:
    baked, 34
    baked stuff, 35
    broiled, 34
    buying, 10
    cheeseburgers, 63
    chowder:
      Manhattan, 55
      New England, 55
    deep-fat fried, 32
    oven-fried, 35
    pan-fried, 32
    salad, souffle, 51
    salmon loaf, 34
    sardine puff, 36
    servings per pound, 7
    storing, 14
    topsy turvy tuna pie, 35

  Frosting. (_See_ Cakes.)

  Fruits. (_See_ Desserts, Pies.)


  Gingerbread, 68

  Goose, roast, 27

  Graham cracker pie crust, 65

  Gravy, 57


  Ham:
    patties, 24
    roast, 18
    slice, broiled, 18
    slice, pan-broiled, 20


  Ice cream desserts:
    buttered nut sundae, 73
    ice cream sandwiches, 73
    pecan balls, 73
    snowballs, 73


  Lamb:
    braised, 21
    chops, broiled, 18
    chops, pan-broiled, 20
    curried, 23
    roast, 18
    stew, irish, 26

  Liver and onions, braised, 24

  Luncheon meat:
    saucy, 25
    special, 23


  Macaroni with cheese sauce, 40

  Meat:
    buying, 8
    curried, 23
    grades, 8
    loaf 25
    salad sandwiches, 63
    salad, souffle, 51
    servings per pound, 7
    storing, 14
    (_See also_ Beef, Lamb, Liver, Luncheon Meat, Pork, Sausage, Veal.)

  Meringue-topped pie, quick, 66

  Muffins:
    blueberry, 61
    bran, 61
    corn, 61
    oatmeal-raisin, 61
    plain, 61


  Noodle(s):
    chicken bake, 30
    homemade, with chicken, 32
    turkey bake, 30


  Oatmeal:
    cookies, 70
    raisin muffins, 61

  Okra and tomatoes, stewed, 45

  Omelet, plain (french), 38

  Onion(s):
    and liver, braised, 24
    in mushroom sauce, 48
    sauce, 57


  Pancakes, 62

  Pastry, for pies, 64

  Pea salad, 53

  Peanut butter cookies, 70

  Peppers, green, stuffed, 25

  Pie(s):
    apple, 64
    blueberry, 65
    cherry, 65
    chicken, 31
    cream:
      banana, 65
      chocolate, 65
      coconut, 65
      vanilla, 65
    fruit delight, 67
    graham cracker crust, 65
    lemon chiffon, 66
    lime chiffon, 67
    pastry, 64
    peach, 65
    pecan, 66
    pumpkin, 66
    quick meringue-topped, 66
    turkey, 31

  Pizza, 40

  Popovers, 60

  Pork:
    braised, 21
    chops, broiled, 20
    curried, 23
    roast, 18
    (_See also_ Ham.)

  Potato(es):
    and sausage, au gratin, 23
    baked stuffed, 48
    patties, 48
    salad, 52
    soup, creamy, 56

  Poultry:
    salad, sandwiches, 63
    salad, souffle, 51
    (_See also_ Chicken, Duck, Goose, Turkey.)

  Prune:
    cake, spiced, 67
    salad, stuffed, 52

  Pudding, raisin-nut bread, 73


  Rice, spanish with cheese, 39

  Rolls, yeast:
    cinnamon-nut, 59
    cloverleaf, 60
    crescent, 59
    plain, 59


  Salad(s):
    chef salad bowl, luncheon, 52
    coleslaw, 52
    creamy fruit, 51
    fish, souffle, 51
    frozen fruit, 51
    marinated vegetable, 50
      asparagus spear, 50
      cucumber and onion, 50
      green bean, 50
      three-bean, 50
    meat, souffle, 51
    pea, 53
    pineapple-carrot, molded, 51
    potato, 52
    poultry, souffle, 51
    prune, stuffed, 52
    suggested combinations:
      fruit, 50
      vegetable, 50

  Salad dressing(s):
    blue cheese, 53
    celery seed, 53
    french:
      basic, 53
      sweet, 53
    orange-honey, 53
    italian, 53
    Roquefort cheese, 53
    thousand island, 53

  Sandwich(es):
    bacon-cheese, 62
    barbecued beef, 63
    fish-cheeseburgers, 63
    grilled open-face, 63
    meat salad, 63
    poultry salad, 63

  Sauces:
    cheese, 57
    egg, 57
    honey-orange, 58
    lemon-butter, 58
    mock hollandaise, 58
    onion, 57
    quick vegetable, 58
    sour cream, 58
    tartar, 58
    white, 57

  Sausage and potatoes au gratin, 23

  Soup(s):
    bean, 55
    broccoli, cream of, 56
    chicken-vegetable, 54
    fish chowder:
      Manhattan, 55
      New England, 55
    potato, creamy, 56
    turkey-vegetable, 54
    vegetable, hearty, 54

  Spaghetti with meat sauce, 24

  Spinach:
    au gratin, quick, 46
    souffle, 44

  Spoonbread, 61

  Squash, zucchini, scalloped, 46

  Steak(s):
    braised, 21
    broiled, 18
    pan-broiled, 20

  Stew:
    beef, 26
    irish, 26

  Stuffing:
    nut, 28
    plain, 28

  Sweetpotatoes in orange shells, 45


  Tomato(es):
    and okra, stewed, 45
    broiled, 45

  Turkey:
    boneless roast, 28
    noodle bake, 30
    pie, 31
    roast, stuffed, 27
    vegetable soup, 54


  Veal:
    braised, 21
    curried, 23
    roast, 18

  Vegetable(s):
    boiled, 42
    chicken soup, 54
    creamed, 43
    mashed, 43
    panned, 44
    salad combinations, 50
    salads, marinated, 50
    sauce, quick, 58
    soup, hearty, 54
    turkey soup, 54
    with a sauce, 44
    with braised chicken, 31
    (_See also_ other Vegetables, Salads, Sauces, Soups.)


  Waffles, 62


U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE: 1968—O-268-520




OTHER PUBLICATIONS


Additional information helpful in preparing meals for your family is
given in these publications, available from the U.S. Department of
Agriculture, Washington, D.C. 20250. Send your request on a post card
and include your ZIP code.

  Beef and Veal in Family Meals: A Guide for Consumers            G 118
  Cheese in Family Meals: A Guide for Consumers                   G 112
  Eggs in Family Meals: A Guide for Consumers                     G 103
  Family Food Budgeting ... for Good Meals and Good Nutrition     G  94
  Food and Your Weight                                            G  74
  Fruits in Family Meals: A Guide for Consumers                   G 125
  How To Buy Fresh Fruits                                         G 141
  How To Buy Fresh Vegetables                                     G 143
  Lamb in Family Meals: A Guide for Consumers                     G 124
  Milk in Family Meals: A Guide for Consumers                     G 127
  Money-Saving Main Dishes                                        G  43
  Nutritive Value of Foods                                        G  72
  Poultry in Family Meals: A Guide for Consumers                  G 110
  Storing Perishable Foods in the Home                            G  78
  Vegetables in Family Meals: A Guide for Consumers               G 105

FAMILY FARE is a result of USDA research. Here, the Agricultural
Research Service brings together information on nutrition, food
management, and food preparation.

Guidelines for nutritious meal planning and for food management came
from the Consumer and Food Economics Research Division of ARS. Basic
cooking methods and recipes were developed and taste-tested in the
ARS Food Quality and Use Laboratory of the Human Nutrition Research
Division. Fish recipes and information on buying fish were contributed
by home economists in the Bureau of Commercial Fisheries, Department of
the Interior.


This is a _Consumer Service_ of USDA
